

Extracted from: 02084-avca-tbi-climatereport_8.pdf
Climate Financing  
in Africa:  
Strategies for the Future
MAY 2023Table of Contents
Foreword 3
Introduction 4
1.1 Glossary of Terms 4
1.2 Climate Change and Its Impact 5
Climate Financing in Africa 6
2.1 Climate Financing Channels 6
2.2 Contextualising Africa’s Climate Finance 7
2.3 Mitigation Efforts Face Greatest Funding Shortfall 7
2.4 Systemic Challenges to Climate Financing in Africa 8
Climate Investment Policies in Africa  12
3.1 Climate Change and Policymaking in Africa: Regional  12 
and National Strategies 
3.2 Outcomes from COP27 and the Future of Climate Investing  13 
and Climate Policy in Africa
Africa’s Climate Investment Landscape 14
4.1 Africa’s Climate Investors 14
4.2 Africa’s Climate Investment Landscape 17
4.3 Africa’s Climate Investment Flows 21
Climate Integration in African Private Capital 34
5.1 Africa’s Climate Funds 34
5.2 Climate Awareness & Internal Buy-In 35
5.3 Opportunities for Climate Investing 36
5.4 Barriers to Climate Investing 39
5.5 Climate Risk Assessment & Portfolio Management 40
5.6 Goal Setting 42
Solutions & Strategies for The Future 43
6.1 Investor Recommendations 43
6.2 Policy Recommendations 50
2 CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREGovernments, businesses and investors must join forces and each play their part. For governments, 
this means creating the appropriate national conditions - through climate policies, public financing 
frameworks, and green growth opportunities - in which the private sector can confidently invest. 
Businesses also need to consider and assess climate-related risks and opportunities in their business 
models, whilst investors do the same to make informed capital allocation decisions and better 
embed climate consideration throughout their investment portfolios. 
Just as the policy and business spheres must work together to tackle climate change, we are 
delighted to present Climate Financing in Africa: Strategies for the Future : a joint report by the 
African Private Capital Association (AVCA) in partnership with the Tony Blair Institute for Global 
Change (TBI). Drawing from both public and private sector expertise, our report examines the state 
of climate financing in Africa and contains valuable recommendations for both governments and 
private sector investors. We believe this collaborative report will no doubt spur effective action and 
have a positive impact in Africa’s fight against climate change.
We would like to extend our sincere appreciation to the industry experts and fund managers that 
participated in this report, as well as the AVCA members that supported this important initiative. At 
AVCA, our mission is to champion private investment in Africa, educating and equipping stakeholders 
within our industry with valuable insights to support the investment ecosystem. We are pleased to 
have TBI as our valued partner for this work, which exemplifies our commitment to providing topical, 
independent, and thoughtful research to the industry. We look forward to continuing our research 
and advocacy on the important role private capital can play in stimulating sustainability and climate 
resilience across the continent, and by extension in accelerating local economic growth.
Abi Mustapha-Maduakor Sam Sharps
Chief Executive Officer Executive Director, Policy
African Private Capital Association Tony Blair Institute for Global ChangeTackling climate change is of vital importance for Africa. The nature of the 
fight against climate change is not straightforward and can come at a cost. 
Our task must therefore be to imagine creative climate-friendly ways through 
which African economies can continue to blossom. One non-negotiable 
element towards the realisation of this goal will have to be financing that is 
much more substantial and sustainable than it is today. 
3
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREForewordIntroduction
1.1 Glossary of Terms
Climate change mitigation:  Efforts to reduce or prevent emission of greenhouse gases which 
can mean using new technologies and renewable energies, making older equipment more 
energy efficient, or changing management practices or consumer behaviour1.
Climate change adaptation:  Changes in process, practices and structures within ecological, 
social or economic systems in response to actual or expected climatic stimuli to moderate 
potential damages or to benefit from opportunities associated with climate change2.
Climate finance:  Local, national, or transnational financing that is drawn from public, private, 
or alternative sources to support climate change efforts3. 
Development Finance Institutions:  Organisations that occupy the space between public 
aid and private investment who share a common focus on fostering economic growth and 
sustainable development by servicing the investment shortfalls of developing countries 
and bridging the gap between commercial investment and state development aid4. These 
organisations include multilateral development banks (MDBs), other international and 
regional financial institutions, national development banks, export credit agencies, and 
private lenders5.
Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD):  a body created by the Financial 
Stability Board (FSD) to develop climate-related financial disclosure recommendations for 
companies and organisations. The TCFD’s 11 disclosure recommendations are structured 
around four thematic areas: governance, strategy, risk management and metrics and targets. 
The purpose of the framework is to support and enable investors, lenders and insurance 
underwriters, etc) to make informed capital allocation decisions by understanding how 
reporting organizations consider and assess climate-related risks and opportunities.
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs):  a requirement for signatories of the Paris 
Agreement to outline and communicate their post-2020 climate action plan to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to climate impacts on a national level, to be updated 
every five years. These plans are non-binding, but must set specific climate targets, define 
how to reach them, and institute monitoring and evaluation systems to evaluate and verify 
progress towards the achievement of these targets. 
Climate Resilience:  the degree to which companies, assets, the built and natural environment 
can anticipate, absorb, adapt to changing climate conditions.
4
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE5
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE
1.2 Climate Change and Its Impact
For many countries around the world, 
climate change will negatively impact their 
food and water security, population health, 
as well as ecological systems. Developing 
countries are expected to bear the brunt of 
the effects of climate change. Out of the 
20 countries worldwide that are the most 
vulnerable to climate change, 16 of them 
are in Africa6. Africa is at the frontline of 
the global climate emergency and is highly 
exposed to climate shocks with about 86 
million people in Africa being displaced 
over the next three decades due to climate 
change7. Climate-induced incidents could 
cause other knock-on effects such as 
decreased agricultural output, reduction 
in land available for in livestock rearing, loss of biodiversity, reduced water resource availability, and 
decreased structural integrity of infrastructure and buildings etc. However, financing climate actions 
globally continues to fall short of the agreed global climate objectives, especially for vulnerable 
countries in parts of Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean. 
The continent is not a major contributor to greenhouse emissions that cause climate change. The 
United States has a population of 333 million people and was responsible for 12.6% of global carbon 
emissions in 20208. In contrast, Africa has a population size of 1.4 billion but accounts for only 3.81% 
of global carbon emissions9. The relative funding gap in addressing climate hazards between Africa 
and other regions of the world is thus deserving of attention. Countries belonging to multilateral 
groupings and development bodies such as UN agencies have sought to address the problem by 
pledging funding packages aimed at assisting developing countries with their climate mitigation 
and climate adaptation efforts. However, for the African continent, there is evidence showing that 
should financing levels continue at their current trajectory, it is unlikely that African governments 
will have the financial capacity to meet their climate change goals and be prepared for the effects 
of climate change. While an average of USD632 billion between 2019 and 2020 was committed to 
climate financing worldwide, this amount remains inadequate with an increase of 590% needed by 
2030 if global climate objectives are to be met10.  
Climate financing for Africa is an issue that needs to be addressed urgently. Inadequate funding 
is not the only challenge: the funding that is committed has also not consistently been delivered. 
An Oxfam report suggests that the actual assistance received by developing countries for climate 
change action to be approximately US$19 to 22.5 billion between 2017-201811, less than a quarter of 
the US$100 billion originally pledged each year12.   
In addition, African government leaders and the donor community need pragmatic and innovative 
policies that respond to the needs of the private sector as partners in climate finance. This report 
provides pathways for both African governments and investors in addressing the climate financing 
gaps and building a resilient and sustainable framework that unlock new funding.  
Out of the 
20 countries 
worldwide that 
are the most 
vulnerable to 
climate change, 
16 of them are 
in Africa3Climate Financing in Africa
2.1 Climate Financing Channels
Climate funding worldwide can generally be sourced from three different channels: national 
government funds, contributions by international development aid agencies , and private sector 
capital . Such funding is then spent for three purposes: mitigation, adaptation, and research and 
development (R&D). Spending could also be cross-sectoral in nature (e.g., distributed across the 
agriculture and infrastructure sectors).
 •National Government Funds  are funds allocated out of the national budget for the purpose of 
climate finance projects, such as meeting national climate change targets. Such funds are usually 
raised through a combination of taxes, green bonds and other related financial instruments. 
Examples of national government that have allocated funds in this regard include Rwanda (RWF 
2.7 trillion13), Zimbabwe (ZWL 52.4 billion14), and the United States (USD 44.9 billion15).
 •Contributions by International Development Aid Agencies and Development Finance Institutions 
refers to capital that is provided on a non-commercial basis and for the purposes of development. 
Examples of these include the African Development Bank’s (AfDB) US$25.71 million Africa Climate 
Change Fund (ACCF), the UNFCCC’s US$10.3 billion Green Climate Fund  (GCF), or the joint World 
Bank-International Finance Cooperation US$8 billion Climate Investment Funds  (CIF).
 •Private Sector Capital  for climate financing are vehicles that mobilise commercial financing from 
investment and equity funds, commercial financial institutions, corporations and the private 
citizen for adaptation and mitigation-related activities. These could be private wealth or financial 
intermediaries with commercial interests in their investments. They provide the investment 
needed to spur innovation and create thriving markets for climate innovation, spanning clean 
energy, sustainable transport, green infrastructure or climate-resilient agriculture. Examples 
include Google’s US$30 million Impact Challenge on Climate Innovation fund .
Sources of funding How funding is allocated
Rwanda: RWF 2.7 trillion
Zimbabwe: ZWL $52.4 billion
United States: USD 44.9 billionNational Government Funds
African Development Bank (AfDB): 
Africa Climate Change Fund (ACCF)
AfDB and the Global Center on 
Adaptation (GCA): Africa Adaptation 
Acceleration Program (AAAP) 
UNFCCC: Green Climate Fund (GCF)
WB-IFC: Climate Investment Funds 
(CIF)International Development 
Aid Agencies
Google: Impact Challenge on 
Climate Innovation
Walmart: Green Financing 
Framework
NORI: Carbon Removal 
MarketplacePrivate Sector / PhilanthropyCôte d'Ivoire: Reducing 30.4% of 
carbon emissions by 2030, USD 
22 billion
Guinea-Bissau: Reducing 30% of 
greenhouse gas emissions by 
2030, USD 694 million
Rwanda: Reducing 38% of 
greenhouse gas emissions by 
2030, USD 11 billionMitigation
Ethiopia: 40 prioritized adaptation 
actions
Malawi: Multi-sectoral adaptation 
actions
Mauritania: Ecosystem conservation 
and bolstering food securityAdaptation
Research grants awarded to 
various climate research agenciesResearch and DevelopmentFunds available 
for tackling 
climate change
Source: Tony Blair Institute (TBI)
6
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE7
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE
2.2 Contextualising Africa’s Climate Finance
Africa’s climate financing for adaptation and mitigation is generally publicly funded through a 
combination of grants, DFIs and national budgets. This is in sharp contrast to the climate investment 
environment in the economically advanced regions of Western Europe, United States, Canada, and 
Oceania, whose climate activities are primarily funded by private finance.  
Climate finance flows in Africa, 2019/2020 (USD billion):
Government (National Budget
and National DFIs)Development Aid Agencies
and Development Finance
Institutes (Bilateral, Multilateral)Private Sector (Corporations,
Commercial Financial Institutions,
Institutional Investors, Individuals)6.716.9
3.4
Source: Climate Policy Initiative
Existing levels of investment are insufficient to tackle the risk that climate change poses. The African 
Development Bank estimates that the total costs of climate change mitigation in Africa in the 
decade between 2020 and 2030 alone will be between USD$1.3 to 1.6 trillion16. However, the report 
also highlights an annual financing gap of approximately US$100 to 127.2 billion in the same decade. 
Such financing gaps appear to be characteristic of climate change financing for Africa. While the 
annual costs for adaptation in Africa is expected to be approximately 30% of global adaptation costs, 
the region received a mere 14% (approx. US$1.6 billion) of non-OECD international public adaptation 
finance, according to the UN Environmental Programme (UNEP)17.
There is also a growing imbalance between Africa and the rest of the world regarding private-
sector investments in climate technological innovation, research and development. According to a 
PwC report tracking climate tech investments, Africa’s share of global investments for the climate 
technology and innovation sector stands at just 0.2%18. In contrast, the share of the US, China, and 
Europe took up 93% of such investments for climate mitigation and adaptation solutions, with the 
US and Canada alone accounting for nearly 50% (approximately US$29 billion of VC investment). In 
addition to shortfalls in funding required to implement the necessary climate mitigation and climate 
adaptation solutions, funds for research and development are also inadequate. Over the last 20 years 
(between 1990-2019), Africa received just a fraction (3.8%) of climate related research funding globally 
with the bulk (78%) of climate R&D funding going to EU and North American research institutes.8
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE2.3 Mitigation Efforts Face Greatest Funding Shortfall 
Considering the growth of infrastructure presently taking place within African countries, it would be 
prudent to ensure that such infrastructures are ‘green’ and climate-friendly to ensure that they help 
governments better meet their declared Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). This is where 
mitigation efforts come in. However, when examining how the funding shortfall is distributed across 
Mitigation and Adaptation, the need for mitigation finance dwarfs that of adaptation, according to 
the NDCs submitted by African governments19. Mitigation measures account for two-thirds (66%) 
of financing needs, in contrast to Adaptation’s one-quarter (24%). Initiatives that have a dual benefit 
(both mitigation and adaptation) account for the final 10%, as illustrated in the diagram below. Within 
sub-Saharan Africa, the need for mitigation-oriented financing paints an even more drastic figure as 
mitigations needs account for 70% or more of financing needs: 77% in West Africa, 75% in Southern 
Africa, 70% in Central Africa, and 57% in East Africa.
Africa’s climate financing needs by type
Mitigation Needs
Adaptation Needs
Dual Beneﬁt66% 10%
24%
Source: Climate Policy Initiative
Policy actions to address the gaps in adaptation financing should also be pursued. Repurposing climate 
financing to bring in domestic and international private sector financing for tech and innovation for 
climate adaptation will build community resilience against climate change in the long run. In the short 
term, mitigation financing that addresses short-term national problems such as unemployment and 
food insecurity should be a core component of Africa’s climate financing policy agenda. 
Meeting these needs through the harnessing of climate investment opportunities requires new and 
innovative financing structures as well as the calculated and strategic usage of public capital on an 
unprecedented scale20. As things stand, aligning capital and traditional financing approaches (e.g., 
concessional loans and grants) promises to optimise the growth of sectoral investment, hence the 
need to deploy new and innovative modes of climate financing structures to catalyse the local private 
investment needed to meet climate financing targets.
2.4 Systemic Challenges to Climate Financing in Africa
Broadly, the systemic challenges to climate financing in Africa can be classified into three major 
clusters: (1) institutional governance gaps, (2) insufficient climate data needed for climate finance 
modelling, and (3) financial sector maturity.9
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREClimate Financing Barrier (1):  Institutional Governance Gaps 
Clashing mandates between national institutions and climate relevant agencies are an institutional 
barrier to climate financing21. This misalignment is compounded by comparatively immature 
governance and regulatory frameworks in Africa. Consequently, governments often struggle to create 
the necessary enabling regulatory environment to attract climate financing from the private sector.
Modelling climate finance projects for presentation to potential investors is also a complex and 
interdisciplinary process. Although African countries do have National-level Agencies or Commissions 
to promote investment within the country, such entities typically do not cover climate investments. 
Modelling climate finance projects also involves input from different ministries (Agriculture, Finance, 
Energy etc.) leading to questions over which government agency should lead this kind of offer 
creation. The challenge is further exacerbated by capacity gaps within governments, including: 
1. Limited capacity to design bankable projects that unlock investments  from both local and 
international DFIs agencies. Poorly packaged projects are less attractive to the green bonds 
markets. 
2. Low institutional capacity to comprehensively monitor climate change dynamics  from both 
policy and economic perspectives. This also cascades into limited capacity to ensure appropriate 
due diligence and accountability measures as well as targeting of suitable climate funds.
3. Lack of mechanisms to coordinate the implementation of climate change action plans  and 
related projects. This also affects the state-private sector relationship as policymakers struggle to 
set a national agenda that is mutually beneficial. 
Having adequate governance frameworks and inclusive processes are therefore a key factor for 
African countries’ ability to adapt, cope and mitigate climate change and to enable climate-resilient 
development. Climate change strategies must be accompanied by relevant policies, budgetary 
support, and capacity-building initiatives in other governance areas such as healthcare and social 
protection22. Having the right governance frameworks and institutional arrangements spanning 
different national sectors forms a critical part of national climate change strategies.
Capacity gaps within Governments to 
attract climate financing from private-
sector sources include: 
1) an absence of bankable projects;  
2) low institutional capacity; and 
3) a deficit of mechanisms to 
effectively scope and coordinate 
the implementation of nationally 
determined climate action plans.10
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREAdditionally, governments and associated organisations tend to approach climate change as 
an environmental issue, as opposed to a developmental one23. This approach to climate change 
has meant that when faced with the energy resource demands caused by a booming population, 
governments might pursue the cheapest sources of energy (i.e., fossil fuels) first, with the social and 
environmental costs of doing so treated as a problem for the future24. However, it is worth noting 
that governments themselves are also faced with the challenge of balancing multiple competing 
demands. Affordable sources of energy such as fossil fuels helps governments spur much-needed 
economic growth, yet risks criticism over their high volumes of carbon emissions. In this regard, 
African governments have much more to consider than their more developed counterparts whose 
industrial revolutions preceded the rise of climate-conscious socio-economic development. All of this 
showcases the institutional challenges that should be overcome when it comes to climate financing. 
Climate Financing Barrier (2): Insufficient Modelling Data
As per World Bank’s 2021 ‘Enabling Private Investment in Climate Adaptation & Resilience’ report, 
there is a dearth of data regarding climate risk and vulnerability at the country-level. This data is 
critical in informing private sector investment decision-making25. Private sector entities are likely to 
continue to have a limited understanding of the climate financing landscape, further limiting their 
ability to assess potential rates of return on investment (ROI) and to take appropriate risks. 
Research has also shown the need for private sector companies to disclose relevant information. The 
Taskforce on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) found that despite the level of climate-
related financial disclosures growing, there remains much room for improvement26. While a majority 
of companies had disclosed TCFD-aligned information, such disclosures remain incomplete. Even 
though 80% of companies disclosed information in at least 1 TCFD-recommended category, 
only 4% of companies disclosed information in all 11 recommended categories. Such disclosure 
is important as 90% of investors and other users use climate-related financial disclosures in their 
decision-making process. Two-thirds of investors also indicated that such disclosures are factored 
into the way they priced financial assets.
Exacerbating this situation is the issue of funding. Scholarly evidence indicates that only 3.8% of 
climate change research funding worldwide covers African topics. Additionally, African institutions 
only account for 14.5% of the 3.8%, meaning that research by African institutions on Africa-related 
climate change topics actually constitutes only 0.55% of the global pool of research funding27. 
This causes a lack of contextual data, which African researchers say serves as a base for providing 
policymakers with the relevant data and knowledge needed for the development of climate strategies 
for local communities28. The lack of relevant R&D infrastructure and the data it provides often results 
in detrimental outcomes. For example, Africa has only 1/8th of the minimum density of weather 
stations recommended by the World Meteorological Organization29. This hampers data collection 
on historical weather patterns which could be used to inform decision-making. Stakeholders cannot 
develop viable projects without data and knowledge on changing local climate patterns, their effects, 
and how resiliency might be embedded into local societies. Without locally generated climate data 
& knowledge outputs, the costs needed to produce suitable climate mitigation and adaptation 
solutions will remain high due to information and knowledge scarcity. The problem is also further 
compounded by the relative lack of dedicated budgets for climate data and knowledge generation. 
All of this contributes to the dearth of climate-related data and knowledge in Africa, which further 
reduces the incentives for the private sector to invest in climate-related initiatives. Climate Financing Barrier (3): Weak Financial Sector
With growing levels of sovereign debt, higher debt servicing costs due to soaring interest rates and 
inflation, and predictions of an impending global recession, deteriorating macroeconomic conditions 
will continue to distort financial outlooks for African governments in the near- to medium-term. 
Historically, African countries have paid higher interest rates for domestic and international credit in 
financial markets due to associated market risks. Access to the green bond market to obtain the capital 
needed for green, sustainable, or social investments remains at a higher cost for high-risk countries 
in Africa. For instance, while African countries hold less than 1% of green bond issuances worldwide, 
they are paying twice the amount of what similarly rated peers would pay to access markets30. 
The relative underdevelopment of Africa’s financial sectors therefore contributes to the lack of 
private sector activity on the climate financing front. Having underdeveloped financial markets 
means that the typical instruments and architecture of green finance (e.g., green banks, national 
climate funds, safeguards to de-risk, financial regulations such as verification mechanisms and 
transparency guarantees) cannot be properly deployed to foster private sector climate investing. 
Additionally, considering that climate change initiatives often have long time horizons, the general 
absence of existing green investment project pipelines discourages many potential private sector 
investors who would have to sink high up-front costs into what amounted as a speculative project.
Without locally generated climate 
data & knowledge outputs, the costs 
needed to produce suitable climate 
mitigation and adaptation solutions 
will remain high due to information 
and knowledge scarcity.Climate Investment Policies in Africa
3.1 Climate Change and Policymaking in Africa:  
Regional and National Strategies
In response to the climate risks faced, the African Union (AU) has outlined its plans for enhancing 
regional climate cooperation and climate-resilient development. The AU’s Climate Change and 
Resilient Development Strategy and Action Plan (2022-2032) has sought to put into place institutions 
and processes that enable a multilateral approach to tackling climate change and climate risk 
management. The African Ministerial Conference on the Environment (AMCEN) has also resulted 
in commitments to reduce methane and carbon emissions in the region31, as well as developing a 
green/blue economy and reducing land degradation and biodiversity loss32. There are also concerted 
efforts by various geographical groups within the continent to bolster their countries’ climate 
change efforts. The Southern African Development Community (SADC), for example, has forged 
partnerships with international organisations like the World Food Program, while the Heads of State 
of the East African Community (EAC) have also started collective efforts to develop a regional climate 
change strategy, masterplan, and policy framework33.
Climate change mitigation Climate change adaptationSouthern African Development 
Community (SADC) has forged 
partnerships with international 
organisations like the World Food 
ProgramHeads of State of the East 
African Community (EAC) 
have started collective efforts 
to develop a regional climate 
change strategy
Benin: renewable energy efforts
Burundi: conservation and 
strengthening carbon sinksZambia, Eritrea, Rwanda: 
national-level plans to restore 
ecosystems that have been 
damaged by climate change
Zambia, Botswana and 
Zimbabwe: adopt 
climate-resilient seeds and 
promoting climate-smart 
innovation for capacity building
African countries have also sought to put into place national climate change policies that are dual 
purpose and cross-sectoral. Such policies often cover both climate mitigation and adaptation 
measures. Both mitigation and adaptation contribute to a green, resilient, and sustainable 
development path and are equally crucial in the fight against climate change - the former allows 
countries to curb the rise of atmospheric temperatures further through the reduction or stabilisation 
of carbon emissions, while the latter bolsters the resilience of populations and bio-ecological 
systems against the impact of climate change.  
12
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE13
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE
Virtually all African countries have declared that the primary goal of their mitigation efforts will be 
to reduce national carbon emissions by a range of 10-50% by 2030. Examples of national efforts 
in support of mitigation include Benin’s renewable energy efforts34 and Burundi’s conservation and 
strengthening carbon sinks35. African countries also have climate change adaptation plans and 
policies to accompany their mitigation counterparts. Agriculture appears to be a common theme 
across the climate change adaptation plans, given that it accounts for close to 25% of sub-Saharan 
Africa’s GDP , and over 60% of the population in sub-Saharan Africa are smallholder farmers36. 
Adaptation efforts in this regard include national-level plans by Zambia37, Eritrea38, Rwanda39 and 
others to restore ecosystems that have been damaged by climate change to boost the resilience 
of local communities against negative climate change impacts – an approach commonly known 
as ecosystem-based adaptation, or EBA40. Other agriculture-related climate change adaptation 
initiatives outlined in national plans and associated policies include efforts to adopt climate-resilient 
seeds41 and promoting climate-smart innovation for capacity building as is the case of Zambia42, 
Botswana43, and Zimbabwe44. African governments consider adaptation to also be a key part of the 
climate change fight, together with mitigation. 
3.2 Outcomes from COP27 and the Future of Climate 
Investing and Climate Policy in Africa
The recent 2022 United Nations Climate Change Conference, or COP27, further signalled the urgency 
of climate change for African countries and recognised the disproportionate impact it will have on 
the continent. Countries agreed in-principle to the establishment of a “loss and damage” fund which 
will provide payouts to developing countries who have incurred losses from climate-induced events 
such as floods, droughts, or wildfires45. The COP27 launch of the Africa Carbon Markets Initiative 
(ACMI) also aims to scale the voluntary carbon markets across Africa and has secured US$200 million 
in advanced market commitments from global companies in support of its ambitions46. There were 
also significant calls for reforming the global financial architecture to better align with climate goals. 
More specifically, these reforms called for multilateral development banks (MDBs) and international 
financial institutions (IFIs) to ensure that they can meet the scale of financing needed for developing 
countries47.
The COP27 launch of the Africa 
Carbon Markets Initiative (ACMI) 
also aims to scale the voluntary 
carbon markets across Africa and 
has secured US$200 millionAfrica’s Climate Investment Landscape
All 54 African countries are signatories of the 2015 Paris Agreement, a legally binding international 
treaty on climate change whose long-term aim is to limit rising global temperatures to within 
1.5°C of pre-industrial levels. US$2.8 trillion is needed to finance the plans for climate mitigation 
(also referred to as nationally determined contributions) African governments have assigned for 
themselves under this Agreement by 203048. The realisation of these country specific targets to 
reduce national emissions and adapt to the impacts of climate change require far more capital than 
is currently available, or being committed to, the continent. 
This section will give a brief introduction to Africa’s climate investment landscape, exploring current 
actors in, channels and categories of climate finance in Africa. It begins with an introduction of the 
breadth of capital sources for climate finance in Africa, highlights the predominant categories of 
climate focused and climate-aware private investing funds in Africa, and concludes by mapping the 
current nature of climate focused funds and private investment on the continent.
4.1 Africa’s Climate Investors
National Governments
No longer a distant predicted future, climate change is now an imminent and alarming reality. As 
governments across the continent contend with declining agricultural productivity, increasing 
desertification, dwindling water supplies and a heightened risk of natural disasters, the necessity 
of increased national spending for climate resilience is now undisputed. African governments have 
committed a cumulative US$264 billion of domestic public resources over 2020 to 2030 towards 
climate adaptation and mitigation49. While this figure represents a commendable effort to meet the 
continent’s commitments under the Paris Agreement, particularly considering the constrained fiscal 
capacity of many African governments, it remains a far cry from the capital needed for even a partial 
implementation of Africa’s nationally determined contributions.
Development Finance Institutions
Africa’s well documented vulnerability to the climate crisis has placed climate resilience at the 
forefront of Africa’s sustainable development agenda in recent years. Although it only contributes 
less than 3% of global carbon emissions, sub-Saharan Africa is the region most vulnerable to the 
adverse effects of anthropogenic climate change50. In partial recognition of the burden of duty owed 
to support Africa’s efforts to build climate resilient economies given this disproportionate burden, 
the 2015 Paris Agreement calls on developed nations to give US$100 billion annually to developing 
countries by 2020. In this vein, Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) committed US$45.8 billion 
to sub-Saharan Africa between 2016 and 2021 to support governmental efforts to build climate 
resilience on the ground.  
US$2.8 trillion is needed to 
finance the plans for climate 
mitigation African governments 
have assigned for themselves 
under this Agreement by 2030
14
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE15
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE
Exhibit 1: Evolution of Climate Finance From Development Finance Institutions, by Region,  
2016 - 202151
Sub-Saharan Africa rose five places to become the largest beneficiary of climate investment from 
development finance institutions in 2021, with funding allocated to the region growing at a CAGR of 
37% between 2016 and 2021.
Multilateral Climate Funds
Another medium for this required international support of Africa’s (and other developing regions) 
low-carbon and climate-resilient transition is in the form of multilateral climate funds. A total of 20 
multilateral climate funds with a cumulative disbursement value of US$2.2 billion52 pooled from 
a coalition of international donors either target Africa specifically, or include Africa as a regional 
focus.
Private Sector
The private sector has also been swept up in the rising tide of climate finance in recent years, albeit 
with a disproportionate focus towards mitigation. As the momentum of the global transition to a Net-
Zero future accelerates, the necessity for climate resilient assets has led to their emergence as an 
investment opportunity for private capital. Notably, private climate finance provided and mobilised 
by developed countries for climate action in developing countries stood at US$13.1 billion in 2020 , 
increasing by close to 30% between 2016 and 202053.Europe
East Asia and the Paciﬁc Middle East and North Africa Central AsiaSub-Saharan Africa South Asia Latin America and the Caribbean2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 20210.8
5.65.3
7.04.32.6
1.95.71.0
7.2
7.45.13.5
4.8
9.01.7
5.1
6.88.84.3
7.0
7.41.5
6.5
23.37.94.2
8.3
9.11.4
6.4
30.46.72.9
8.0
12.81.9
6.0
6.49.84.1
8.2
16
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREThe spectrum of climate-related private investment funds, each employing unique strategies to 
address various sustainability objectives, can be divided into the following broad categories: 
Exhibit 2: Categories of Climate Focused and Climate-Aware Private Investing Funds54
LOW CARBON
Low Carbon funds typically make sector-agnostic investments in companies with 
reduced carbon intensity and/or carbon footprint relative to a benchmark index. 
CLIMATE CONSCIOUS
Climate Conscious funds typically target companies that consider climate change 
in their business strategy. These companies need not be solely climate focused but 
are better prepared for the transition to a low-carbon economy than mainstream 
companies given their climate consciousness. Because of the large subset of 
companies that meet this description, climate conscious funds share an overlapping 
or hybrid profile to low carbon and climate solution funds.
CLIMATE SOLUTIONS
Climate Solutions funds only target companies that are contributing to the transition 
to a low-carbon economy through their products and services and in companies that 
will benefit from this transition.
GREEN BONDS
Although Green Bonds share the same structure, risk, and return features of traditional 
bonds, they differ in the intended purpose of their proceeds. Green bonds raise funding 
exclusively for projects with a sustainable development focus and a positive climate 
and environmental outcome. Green Bonds are typically earmarked for high return 
but low risk projects, particularly within the Renewable Energy, Clean Transportation, 
Green Buildings, Water and Sanitation sectors.
CLEAN ENERGY & TECH
Clean Energy & Tech funds typically make sector-specific investments the Renewables 
space, targeting companies that contribute to or facilitate the clean energy transition. 
These climate categories are relatively fluid, in that private capital funds in each category type can 
invest in companies whose goods and services provide solutions for climate change mitigation  
and / or adaptation.17
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE4.2 Africa’s Climate Investment Landscape
All five of these themes are visible in Africa’s climate investment landscape and will be discussed in 
turn, in order of their predominance.
    Clean Energy and Tech
Clean energy funds are a dominant force in the continent’s climate investment landscape. The 
necessity for clean and renewable energy solutions in Africa is at an all-time high. The demand 
for reliable and affordable energy has grown concomitantly to the continent’s economic growth, 
industrialisation, increasing urbanisation and rapid population growth in recent years. The already 
compelling case for the adoption of modern renewable energy in Africa is compounded given the 
sheer breadth of Africa’s renewable resources, spanning bioenergy, hydropower, solar, wind and 
geothermal energy. 
Accordingly, investors are betting big on clean and renewable energy to plug Africa’s energy deficit 
and support the continent’s strides towards electrification. Slightly less than US$150 billion of private 
capital is projected to enter the African energy market by 202855. In all likelihood, a significant 
proportion of this will be channelled to renewable energy ventures, given scientific advancements in 
renewable energy technology making it a highly accessible and newly affordable source of electricity 
in Africa. The popularity of funds raising clean energy funds in Africa’s climate investment landscape 
is visible in the sectoral breakdown of private capital fundraising for 2021. Illustratively, 53% (US$2.3 
billion) of the total private capital fundraising value reported in Africa in 2021 originated from 
sector specific funds in the Renewable Energy sector56. 
Clean and renewable energy funds currently fundraising include the US$300 million Pan-African 
Renewable Energy Fund (PAREF) launched by Harith General Partners and Anergi Group in June 
2022 to accelerate renewable energy adoption across Africa. Other examples are the US$150 
million CrossBoundary Energy Access Fund  which serves as Africa’s first project financing facility 
for mini-grids launched by CrossBoundary in 2019, as well as the US$80 million target fundraise by 
Serengeti Energy  to increase its portfolio of renewable energy projects in Africa. Given the number 
of specialised vehicles raising exclusively clean and renewable energy focused funds currently on the 
market, we can expect this already significant sub-category of Africa’s climate investment landscape 
to continue its ascent in the near- and long-term future. 
Underpinning the economic viability of Africa’s renewable energy solutions is a wave of innovative 
power generation technologies making renewable energy cost competitive to conventional fossil 
fuels57. Demonstratively, solar electricity costs fell by 82% between 2010 and 2019, while electricity 
generation costs from wind projects saw contraction of 50-60% in the same period58. Given the 
galvanising force of digitalisation and technology developments in reducing costs for renewable 
energies, clean technology funds are becoming a prominent feature of Africa’s climate investment 
landscape. A good example is in the disbursements made within Africa’s share of the Climate 
Investment Funds  (CIF) - a multilateral climate finance mechanism at the forefront of climate action 
in developing countries, of which the private sector is the biggest financial contributor. Of the CIF’s 
four key programs in Africa, Clean Technology has seen the most investment by far at US$2.31 
billion, significantly outpacing the combined commitments made to the Forest Investment, Climate 
Resilience and Renewable Energy programs, which jointly comprise US$626 million (as of December 
2021)59. 18
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE    Climate Solutions 
A small but growing number of Climate Solutions funds have emerged in recent years as capital 
allocators mobilise resources to support Africa’s growing entrepreneurial talent pioneering climate 
resilience in their local communities. Examples of climate solutions funds active in Africa’s climate 
investment landscape includes the E3 Low Carbon Economy Fund I , a venture capital fund investing in 
new generation climate smart and climate transition businesses in Africa. This fund continues the legacy 
of Energy Access Ventures (now rebranded to E3) to invest in companies with digitised, decentralised 
and decarbonised innovative business models, following the successful US$90 million final close of 
its maiden fund in 2017. Another example is the US$30 million pre-seed fund and accelerator from 
Catalyst Fund launched in October 2022 to back high-impact tech startups providing climate solutions 
that improve the resilience of underserved, climate-vulnerable communities across Africa.
Signalling the growing interest in companies that are contributing to the transition to a low-carbon 
economy is the entrance of corporate venture capital in the climate solutions space. The launch of the 
Diageo Climate Solutions fund by multinational alcoholic beverage company Diageo PLC in August 
2022 is a notable example. The fund is targeted at early-stage companies and innovators deploying 
technology to enhance farmer resilience to water, climate, and biodiversity impacts in Africa.
    Climate Conscious
Climate conscious funds typically target companies that consider climate change in their business 
strategy and have overlapping foci with low carbon and climate solution funds, given the breadth of 
companies that meet this description. As demonstrated further in Section 5, awareness of climate 
impact (i.e. the specific risks and opportunities of climate change) amongst the private sector and 
private investors active on the continent has grown significantly in the last few years. 
“The level of awareness has skyrocketed. It’s front and centre, people now 
have a better understanding of what it entails. Some of the big institutional 
investors – pension funds and asset managers – that didn’t want to hear our 
story 12 years ago are now well aware of climate-conscious investing and 
are interested in it. A lot of them have set up divisions or subsidiaries within 
their firms to launch resource-efficient or climate funds. Y ou see it all the 
time now: new divisions, new funds, and new managers are focusing on the 
climate investment theme. Climate consciousness has definitely gained a 
lot more traction and interest globally and, while it’s still unfolding, the 
pure commercial reality of it is now also being accepted.”
- Marc Immerman, Managing Principal of Metier Sustainable Capital, Metier19
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREAs climate consciousness continues to penetrate in the industry, a broader swathe funds and fund 
managers will begin to fall into this category. Examples of private capital fund managers that have 
adopted a climate lens in their investment philosophy and can now be deemed climate conscious 
includes AfricInvest, one of Africa’s first private capital fund managers and an early pioneer in the 
industry. The firm, which targets growth-capital investments in small and medium-sized enterprises 
on the continent, announced its plans to begin work on the AfricInvest Climate Fund , which will 
focus on investments in climate change mitigation and adaptation solutions60. Another example is 
impact investor LeapFrog Investments, which launched a new climate strategy in November 2022 
to support companies and technologies that enable both mitigation of and adaptation to climate 
change by lower-income people61. Their climate strategy is self-described as “a natural extension 
of the firm’s 15-year journey as a pioneer of impact investing”62, broadening the firm’s investment 
strategy which previously focused on high-growth, purpose-driven companies in the Healthcare and 
Financial Services sectors in emerging markets.
    Low Carbon
Low Carbon funds are a relatively niche subset of climate-themed investment funds in Africa. 
Although Africa is presently the lowest contributor of greenhouse gas emissions globally, the 
continent’s rapidly growing economies, ambitious development goals and expanding population 
means its energy consumption will rise significantly in the next few decades. As the continent 
with arguably the most ground to cover from a socio-economic development perspective, key to 
the achievement of the Net-Zero agenda and fulfilment of global climate targets is ensuring that 
Africa’s development trajectory coincides with a just energy transition. Despite this impetus for a 
low carbon development path, companies advancing products or services with a reduced carbon 
footprint received the lowest proportion of private capital deal activity by both volume and value in 
Africa between 2002 and 2022. That said, this cohort saw the most development of all the climate 
categories, growing at a CAGR of 23% in the same period (discussed in more detail in Section 4.3). 
Companies and projects in the low carbon category are not only accelerating Africa’s transition to 
carbon neutrality by 2050, they are also uniquely placed to earn additional revenue with carbon 
credits. Companies active in this space include KOKO Networks , a Kenyan climate tech startup that 
distributes liquid ethanol cooking fuel as a cheaper and cleaner alternative to charcoal. The company’s 
Koko Climate division produces and trades carbon credits which are “verified through a UNFCCC 
Clean Development Mechanism programme and then traded into global compliance and voluntary 
markets” according to CEO and co-founder Greg Murray63. Another is Powerstove Energy , a Nigerian 
manufacturer of smokeless, tech-enabled biomass cookstoves that also generates electricity. The 
company’s proprietary software tracks, quantifies and monetises carbon credits from their clean 
cookstoves, with revenue generated from selling carbon credits going into research, development, 
and financing of their product. The Africa Carbon Markets Initiative launched at COP27, which aims 
to scale voluntary carbon markets across Africa to unlock US$6 billion in revenue by 203064, will 
likely increase the demand and financing for companies and projects in Africa delivering co-benefits 
beyond emission reductions. Private capital investors already active in this space include Persistent 
Energy Capital, a venture builder which seeks positive impact by promoting carbon-neutral economic 
development as well as the Spark+ Africa Fund, a US$70 million impact investment fund financing 
low-carbon companies that offer next-generation, distributed cooking energy solutions to the mass 
market in sub-Saharan Africa.20
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE    Green Bonds
Green bonds are fixed-income instruments that raise capital from investors through the debt capital 
market, specifically earmarked to finance projects that generate positive environmental and climate 
outcomes. Their appeal lies in their structure, which enables investors to balance risk-adjusted 
financial returns with environmental benefits and disperse ownership of debt across investors. A 
robust secondary market for bonds promotes liquidity, offering an avenue for investors that may 
prefer short-term exit strategies to still satisfy internal ESG or green investment mandates. Finally, 
the stringency of proceeds uses and reporting requirements for green bonds also offer improved risk 
assessment in an otherwise opaque fixed income market65. 
Africa’s first green bond, which was also the first such issuance from an emerging market, was 
issued in South Africa in 201266. As of September 2022, over 50 green bonds have been issued on 
the continent from a range of sovereign, supranational and commercial actors67. 
ISSUER TYPE CUMULATIVE VALUE
Sovereign US$1.44 billion
Commercial & Private Investors US$3.79 billion
Supranational US$3.695 billion
While innovative, green bonds remain a relatively under-utilised financial instrument in Africa’s climate 
landscape for a number of reasons, including: the nascency of the continent’s capital markets; the 
high up-front and ongoing costs related to labelling, certification and reporting of green bonds; and 
challenges related to managing and tracking proceeds. To date, there have only been four sovereign 
issuers of Green, Social, and Sustainable (GSS) bonds in Africa68, with the governments of Benin 
(2021), Egypt (2020), Seychelles (2018) and Nigeria (2017) having raised sovereign green bonds.
The uptake of green bonds amongst sub-national actors is more prominent, with financial 
institutions and corporations making use of green bonds with increasing frequency in recent years. 
In 2018, Nedbank successfully raised The Renewable Energy Bonds , becoming the first private sector 
institution to raise a green bond that was Climate Bonds Certified in South Africa69. In 2019, the 
US$40 million Acorn Green Bond  became Kenya’s first (and thus far only) green bond, earmarked 
to finance environmentally friendly student accommodation. In Morocco, approximately 5 green 
bonds raising over US$400 million cumulatively have been issued to date, the most recent being the 
MAD1 billion green infrastructure bond raised by The National Railways Office in July 2022 to finance 
an electrified high-speed train line project. In addition to the preceding, Cote D’Ivoire, Mauritius and 
Namibia are the only other countries to have successfully raised a green bond70. Overall, although 
green bonds remain an under-explored frontier for mobilising public sector resources for sustainable 
and climate financing in Africa, the private sector is leveraging this instrument with increasing scale 
and frequency. 21
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE4.3 Africa’s Climate Investment Flows 
Africa is home to a veritable fount of climate-related investment opportunities, from sustainable 
agribusiness to renewable energy, waste management and electric mobility, amongst several others. 
Climate consciousness has percolated into Africa’s private investment landscape with increasing 
depth in recent years, and private capital investors are responding to the developmental and moral 
imperative to contribute towards the realisation of a climate-resilient future on the continent. Private 
capital investors across a broad cross-section of sectors, asset and stage focuses are adopting a 
climate lens to their investment approaches. This section maps the current nature of these climate 
focused private investments on the continent, exploring the asset classes, sectors and geographies 
that successfully raised private capital in the last decade.
Key Findings 2012-2022:
822 US$17.4 billion
Utilities
Clean Energy & Tech 49%US$7.8 millionUS$27.5 million
East AfricaTotal volume of climate-  
related investments
Median deal size*Total value of climate-related 
investments
Most active sector by  
deal volume (42%)
Most active climate category by  
deal volume (41%)of climate-related private capital investments 
that took place in Africa between 2012 and  
2022 were in technology or tech-enabled 
companies or projects.Average deal size*
Most active region by  
deal volume (32%)
* Please note the average and median are calculated excluding deals where the deal value is not disclosed.
Climate Investment Flows by Asset Class
The preceding decade has seen close to a four-fold increase in private capital allocated to climate-
related assets, projects and companies in Africa. A total of 822 climate-related investments with a 
cumulative value of US$17.4 billion took place on the continent between 2012 and 2022, with deal 
activity largely maintaining a steady upward trend in that time. The evolution of deal activity has been 
modest (at a CAGR of 15%), and this growth trajectory reflects the similarly slow moving / gradual 
permeation of climate consciousness amongst investment managers allocating on the continent.22
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREFigure 1:  Volume of Climate-Related Private Capital Deals Reported In Africa, By Year
Mirroring trends in the wider configuration of Africa’s private capital ecosystem, venture capital leads 
the charge of climate-related investments that took place in Africa between 2012 and 2022, accounting 
for an annual average of 56%. However, venture capital only becomes a noticeable cornerstone of 
the climate investing ecosystem from 2020 onwards, where the pace of venture capital deal making 
thereafter assumes over two thirds of annual deal volumes reported on the continent. These venture 
capital investments were largely in early-stage companies in the Information Technology sector (for 
companies operating in the Semiconductors & Semiconductor Equipment and Software & Services 
sub-industries) as well as the Consumer Discretionary Sector (specifically the Consumer Durables & 
Apparel sub-industry).
Next is private equity, which routinely drew the second largest proportion of private capital allocated 
to climate resilient assets and companies in Africa in the last decade. Although far from uniform, 
private debt strategies have been a feature of Africa’s climate investing ecosystem since the 
early-2010s. Key players within this asset class include Lion’s Head Global Partners , responsAbility 
Investments , SunFunder  and the Electrification Financing Initiative (ElectriFI) . Examples of recent 
private debt transactions include the US$23 million debt funding round in June 2022 for Yellow , a 
South African FinTech startup delivering energy financing products to low-income households in 
Malawi and Uganda. Another is the US$425 million senior and mezzanine funding for independent 
power producer Genser Energy Ghana  from a consortium of international banks and funds in July 
2022. The transaction is part of Genser’s decarbonization strategy to achieve net zero carbon emissions 
by 203571. Given the significance of energy infrastructure investments facilitating renewable energy on 
the continent and the resource intensity of the same, it is likely that appetite for and uptake of private 
debt will only intensify to meet the need for concessional, patient climate capital in project finance. 0306090120
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2022 2021 2020263947597774
6695111124
10423
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREFigure 2: Volume of Climate-Related Private Capital Deals Reported In Africa, By Year and Asset 
Class
When broken down by deal value, the evolution of climate-related deal activity in Africa’s private 
capital industry reveals a more fractured picture. Steady annual growth is only visible in the period 
between 2020 and 2022, with the preceding years characterised by fluctuating aggregate deal values. 
In spite of this uneven development, a modest upward concave growth curve is visible with the value 
of climate related investments growing at a CAGR of 14% in the decade between 2012 and 2022. 
Two years stand out as outliers in this period: 2013 and 2017. A strong private equity performance in 
2013 and the large contribution of deals from the infrastructure asset class in 2017 account for the 
elevated deal values in these years. Excluding the preceding, private capital deal values for climate-
related investments in Africa averaged US$1.3 billion annually between 2012 and 2022. 
Africa’s private capital industry has historically focused on supporting small and medium sized 
enterprises, leading to a prevalence of deals with smaller ticket sizes befitting the size and needs 
of these enterprises. The same is visible in the repartition within the climate investing ecosystem, 
where 65% of all deals with disclosed funding fall in the US$10 million and under category. Only 6% 
of private capital deals with disclosed funding in climate-related projects or companies between 
2012 and 2022 were in excess of US$100 million, with almost the entirety of deals in this subject 
going towards the (re)financing of renewable energy infrastructure projects. The only exception to 
this is the US$238 million multi-currency receivable financing facility for solar home lighting and 
power products developer d.Light  in June 2022.2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2022 2021 2020263947597774
6695111124
104
14
7
17
66
Venture Capital Private Equity Infrastructure Private Debt24
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREFigure 3: Value of Climate-Related Private Capital Deals Reported In Africa, By Year (US$ bn)
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2022 2021 20200.42.6
1.9
0.91.03.3
1.11.6
1.31.51.8
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2022 2021 20200.8
0.1
0.5
0.4
Venture Capital Private Equity Infrastructure Private Debt0.42.6
1.9
0.91.03.3
1.11.6
1.31.51.8Figure 4:  Value of Climate-Related Private Capital Deals Reported In Africa, By Year and Asset Class 
(US$ bn)25
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREClimate Category:  
 Climate SolutionsClimate Category:  
 Climate SolutionsClimate Category:  
Climate SolutionsSistema.bio
A biodigester manufacturer 
that enables farmers 
to convert waste into 
renewable energy and 
organic fertilizer. The 
company raised a US$15.6 
million Series B round in 
February 2022 to scale 
its waste-to-energy 
technology75. BBOXX
A manufacturer of decentralized 
energy systems created to 
improve access to energy. 
BBOXX secured a US$15 million 
local currency loan from SBM 
Bank and GuarantCo in January 
202276, closing out the year 
with another EUR11 million 
loan from the Off Grid Energy 
Access Fund in November 
2022 to ramp up their clean 
electrification delivery in Togo77.Aceleron
A clean technology 
company manufacturing 
sustainable, recyclable 
lithium batteries. Aceleron 
raised a £5 million 
Series A in January 2022 
to accelerate battery 
innovation in Africa78.Climate Category:  
 Clean Energy & TechClimate Category:  
 Clean Energy & TechCrossBoundary Energy 
Access (CBEA)
Africa’s first project 
financing facility for mini-
grids. CBEA announced 
US$25 million of new senior 
debt funding commitments 
from a consortium of 
investors in June 2022, 
enabling the company to 
make deployments to its 
near-term pipeline of solar 
powered mini-grids74.Climate Investment Flows by Climate Category
Companies that contribute to or facilitate the clean energy transition in the Clean Energy & Tech 
category were the largest recipients of private capital in Africa, with the exception of 2022. A total of 
333 deals with a cumulative value of US$14 billion fell into this category – accounting for 41% of the 
total volume and a substantial 81% of the total value of climate-related private capital deal activity 
in Africa between 2012 and 2022. While the production costs of renewables have fallen significantly 
with the introduction of technology, clean-energy projects remain capital and resource intensive, 
hence this category’s command of such a high proportion of total deal value. Examples of companies 
in this category that recently raised funding include:
Virunga Power
 
A distributed renewable 
energy company. Virunga 
Power received a US$50 
million investment from 
Gridworks (a British 
International Investment 
Company) in December 
2022 to fund new projects 
in Burundi, Malawi, Zambia 
and Kenya72.Serengeti Energy
 
A sub-Saharan Africa 
independent power 
producer. Serengeti 
Energy received a US$80 
million investment from 
Swedfund, Proparco (both 
DFIs) and STOA, a French 
impact investment fund in 
June 202273.
Companies providing Climate Solutions were the second largest recipients of private capital in Africa 
and were the subject of growing investor interest over the years, coming to eclipse the Clean Energy 
& Tech category in 2022. A total 251 deals with a cumulative value of US$2.3 billion fell into this 
category – accounting for 31% of the total volume and 13% of the total value of climate-related 
private capital deal activity in Africa between 2012 and 2022. Examples of companies that contribute 
to, or benefit from, the transition to a low-carbon economy through their products and services that 
recently raised funding include:Climate Category:  
 Clean Energy & Tech26
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREClimate Category:  
Low CarbonClimate Category:  
Low CarbonClimate Category:  
Low CarbonAlthough companies in the Low Carbon category received the lowest proportion of private capital 
deal activity by both volume and value, this cohort saw the most development of all the climate 
categories, growing at a CAGR of 23% between 2002 and 2021. A total of 96 deals with a cumulative 
value of US$0.3 billion fell into this category – accounting for 12% of the total volume and 2% of 
the total value of climate-related private capital deal activity in Africa between 2002 and 2022. 
Examples of companies advancing products or services with a reduced carbon intensity / footprint 
that recently raised funding include:
Shift EV
An Egyptian electric 
mobility startup. The 
company raised a US$9 
million Series A funding 
round in April 2022 led by 
Algebra Ventures and other 
investors. BasiGo
A Kenyan e-mobility 
startup developing electric 
buses for bus owners. 
The company raised a 
US$6.6 million seed round 
in November 2022 to 
begin commercial delivery 
of locally-manufactured 
electric buses and charging 
infrastructure.BURN Manufacturing
A manufacturer of clean-
burning biomass, electric and 
LPG cookstoves designed 
to provide clean cooking 
services. BURN Manufacturing 
raised US$4 million in June 
2022 to finance the expansion 
of its business in new markets, 
including Somalia, Ghana, 
Nigeria, Mozambique, and 
the Democratic Republic of 
Congo.79
Figure 5: Volume of Climate-Related Private Capital Deals Reported In Africa, By Climate Category
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2022 2021 2020263947597774
6695111124
104
19
17
37
31
Clean Energy & Tech Climate Solutions Climate Conscious Low Carbon27
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREFigure 6:  Value of Climate-Related Private Capital Deals Reported In Africa, By Climate Category 
(US$ bn)
RENEWABLE 
CATEGORYPROJECT 
NAMEHQ 
COUNTRYDEAL 
DATEDEAL 
VALUE 
(US$ MN)DESCRIPTION
WindSidi Mansour 
WindfarmTunisia Jun-20 40.0 30 MW wind farm in Northern 
Tunisia.
Windlab 
AfricaSouth 
AfricaAug-22 55.0 Developer and financier of 
wind projects and farms in East 
and Southern Africa.2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2022 2021 20200.1
0.2
0.6
0.90.42.6
1.9
0.91.03.3
1.11.6
1.31.51.8
Clean Energy & Tech Climate Solutions Climate Conscious Low Carbon
Climate Investment Flows by Sector
Utilities (42%), Information Technology (18%), and Consumer Discretionary (13%) were the three 
most active sectors by volume for climate-related private capital investments spanning 2012 and 
2022. Capitalising on the depth and breadth of renewable energy sources the continent has to 
offer, deals backing renewable electricity producers were the driving force for the prominence of 
the Utilities sector in Africa’s climate ecosystem. Funding recipients in this sector were a varied 
combination of independent power and renewable electricity producers harnessing the power of 
Solar (49%), Wind (13%), Geothermal (8%), Hydropower (7%) and Biomass (6%) energy solutions. 
Examples of renewable projects and companies that received funding in the last few years include:28
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURERENEWABLE 
CATEGORYPROJECT 
NAMEHQ 
COUNTRYDEAL 
DATEDEAL 
VALUE 
(US$ MN)DESCRIPTION
SolarEmpower 
New EnergyPan-Africa May-22 74.0 Renewable energy investment 
company with a focus on 
solar projects for commercial 
and industrial energy users in 
Africa. 
Infinity Solar Egypt Nov-22 41.5 Developer and financier of 
renewable energy solutions 
that that facilitate long-term 
clean power to Egypt.
BiomassBIOVEA 
Energie Côte 
d’IvoireJun-21 220.0 Developer and operator of a 
46 MW biomass power plant 
project in Côte d’Ivoire.
Freetown 
Waste 
TransformersSierra 
LeoneMay-22 2.9 Waste-to-value solution 
provider turning organic waste 
into electricity.
GeothermalCorbetti 
Geothermal 
Project   Ethiopia   Jun-14 - 1000+MW geothermal project 
in the Corbetti Caldera region 
of Ethiopia.
Menengai 
Geothermal 
ProjectKenya Dec-22 108.0 Greenfield geothermal project 
in Kenya.
HydropowerAchwa 1 
Hydropower 
ProjectUganda May-19 70.0 112 MW run-of-river 
hydropower platform in 
Northern Uganda.
Asonha 
EnergieGabon Jul-21 196.6 Developer and operator of the 
first private sector led hydro 
plant in Gabon.
By deal value, the Utilities sector consistently assumed the lion’s share of annual aggregates, 
accounting for a colossal 84% (US$14.6 billion) of the total sum of private capital deal in climate-
related projects and companies in Africa between 2012 and 2022. Despite these investments in 
renewable energy systems facilitating Africa’s climate transition, it nevertheless falls short of Africa’s 
needs in this regard, which are estimated at US$ 133 billion80.29
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREFigure 7:  Volume of Climate-Related Private Capital Deals Reported In Africa, By Sector
0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2022 2021 2020
Utilities Information Technology Consumer Discretionary Industrials Financials
Materials Communication Services Consumer Staples Energy Health Care0306090120150
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2022 2021 2020
Utilities Information Technology Consumer Discretionary Industrials Financials
Materials Communication Services Consumer Staples Energy Health Care
Figure 8:  Value of Climate-Related Private Capital Deals Reported In Africa, By Sector (US$ bn)30
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREInformation Technology was the second most popular sector by both deal volume and value, drawing 
a total of 152 deals with a cumulative value of US$1.3 billion between 2012 and 2022. Companies 
manufacturing Semiconductors & Semiconductor Equipment (i.e. the raw material and equipment 
used in the solar power industry, including solar modules and cells) attracted the bulk – 55% – of deal 
activity in this sector. Examples of deals in this category include the US$26 million equity investment 
in Azuri Technologies , a developer of solar systems supplying energy to rural off-grid communities 
in Africa (2019); the US$1.5 million seed investment Auxano Solar , a Ugandan manufacturer and 
designer of solar panels (2020); and the US$8 million Series A in SolarPanda , a Kenyan designer 
and manufacturer of pay-as-you-go solar home systems (2022). The surge of companies producing 
solar-based products and harnessing technological solutions to reduce the productive costs of solar 
energy is a major driving force for the exponential rise of solar energy solutions amongst renewable 
options in Africa.  
Another growing vertical within the Information Technology sector are companies providing 
smart energy management solutions. These tech-enabled platforms and software monitor energy 
consumption and improve efficiency real-time controls to minimize energy consumption and 
wastage for a lower carbon footprint. These service providers fall within the Software and Services 
sub-industry, which only accounted for a handful of deal activity in the early 2010s, but grew at 
a CAGR of 67% between 2016 and 2022. Examples of energy management companies that have 
received private capital funding include Nigeria’s SHYFT Power Solutions  that provides integrated 
software solutions to optimize energy asset performance; UK-based smart metering technology 
company SteamaCo  which has operations throughout sub-Saharan Africa, and Kenya’s low-cost 
metering solutions developer SparkMeter .
Finally, Consumer Discretionary was the third most popular sector by both deal volume and value, 
drawing a total of 108 deals with a cumulative value of US$0.3 billion between 2012 and 2022. 
Climate-related companies that received private capital investments in this sector covered a broad 
range of consumer goods and services, including:
Climate Category: 
Low CarbonClimate Category: 
Low CarbonClimate Category: 
Low CarbonLi-ionConsumer Durables & ApparelAutomobiles 
& Components
Lithium-ion batteries 
can store energy from 
renewable resources, are 
greener to manufacture, 
biodegradable, recyclable 
and emission-free. They 
are also the most efﬁcient 
power source for other 
climate-smart innovations, 
including electric vehicles 
and solar applications.Electric vehicles can 
produce zero tailpipe 
emissions, and thus a 
cleaner alternative to petrol 
or diesel cars. Recharging 
using renewable energy 
sources further lowers the 
carbon intensity of using 
electric vehicles.Clean cookstoves ensure a 
more efﬁcient combustion 
of fuel, improved heat 
transfer leading to 
reduction in fuel demand, 
and lower emissions of 
climate pollutants (carbon 
dioxide and black carbon 
emissions).Electric Vehicles Biomass / Clean 
Energy CookstovesLithium 
Batteries31
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE  SECTOR SPOTLIGHT: CLEANTECH
49% of climate-related private capital investments that took place in Africa 
between 2012 and 2022 were in technology or tech-enabled companies or 
projects.
CleanTech emerged as the most active vertical amongst technology or tech-enabled 
companies that successfully raised private capital in the last decade. A largely sector and 
asset agnostic vertical, CleanTech refers to companies that harness or develop technology 
which seeks to improve environmental sustainability or to reduce the negative environmental 
impact of natural resources consumed through human activities. CleanTech deal activity will 
likely continue its ascent in forthcoming years, as impact investors motivated to meet Africa’s 
sustainable development agenda back the growing number of companies and projetcs 
delivering innovative, effective, and sustainable solutions to pressing socio-environmental 
challenges. Notable CleanTech deals that took place recently include the US$19 million 
Series C round in Kenyan sanitation and waste management company Sanergy, as well as 
the US$6.2 million Series A in Romco Group, a clean-tech metals recycling company.
Climate Investment Flows by Geography
From a regional perspective, East Africa was a hub for climate-related investments and received 
the largest proportion of climate-related private capital investments (33%) between 2012 and 
2022. East Africa eclipsed Southern Africa in 2014 and has consistently claimed the top spot by 
deal value thereafter. The region owes its prominence in Africa’s climate financing ecosystem to 
Kenya’s popularity amongst impact and climate-focused investors. Notably, Kenya accounted for 
44% of the total volume and 48% of the total value of deals within the region. Kenya is a leader 
in clean energy development in Africa, with more than 90% of its on-grid electricity coming from 
renewable sources. In line with the local government’s Vision 2030 Agenda , Kenya updated its NDC 
Targets in 2021 and committed to reduce its already low greenhouse gas emissions a further 32% 
by 203081. The prioritisation of low-carbon, climate resilient development and public investments 
by the Kenyan government in recent years, which sets the East African country on track to meeting 
all five climate action targets set out in SDG 13 by 2030, was a driver of private capital investment 
activity in East Africa in the decade between 2002 and 2022.
By deal value, West Africa was the leading force on the continent, drawing 25% of the total value of 
climate-related private capital investments which took place on the continent in the last ten years. 
Deal activity in Ghana specifically was responsible for US$2.7 billion of the US$4.4 billion of private 
capital investment West Africa accumulated in this period. This was made possible by a series of 
large infrastructure investments including US$2 billion in TC’S Energy to fund of the development 
of the Seawave Power Project in August 2017, as well as the US$425 million senior and mezzanine 
funding for independent power producer Genser Energy in July 2022. Additionally, almost half (44%) 
of infrastructure investments recorded on the continent in 2021 were in West Africa82. Worth noting 
is the regional heterogeneity of climate-related private capital investments in West Africa, which 
showed more variation / diversification than any other region. More specifically, 11 countries in West 
Africa were recipients of climate-related private capital investments in the last decade, spanning 
regional heavyweights such as Nigeria and Ghana as well as frontier markets in Francophone West 
Africa such as Burkina Faso, Mali and Benin. 32
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREIn third place, Southern Africa attracted 18% of the total volume of climate-related private capital 
investments in Africa between 2012 and 2022, and a similar proportion (19%) of aggregate deal 
values in the same period. As the largest economy in the region, South Africa cornered the Southern 
African market, accounting for two thirds of deal volume and 86% of deal value therein. Southern 
Africa slid to 3rd place in the continental climate finance arena, which it continues to occupy, in 
2016. This coincides with the slowdown of the South Africa Renewable Energy Independent Power 
Producer Procurement Programme, a government initiative designed to facilitate private sector 
investment into grid-connected renewable energy generation, which stalled in 201583. This led to a 
decrease in private participation and investments in utility-scale renewable energy projects and may 
be influencer of Southern Africa’s gradual descent over time as a leading recipient of private capital 
deal activity in climate-related companies, assets and projects, given the region’s inter-relatedness 
with South Africa.
Figure 9: Share of Climate-Related Deal Volume in Africa by Region and Category; Top 3 Countries 
By Volume, 2002-2022  
Nigeria
65 deals
Ghana 
22 dealsNorth Africa 8%
Clean Energy & Tech
East Africa 32%
Climate Solutions
West Africa 19%
Clean Energy & Tech
Central Africa 3%
Clean Energy & Tech
Southern Africa 18%
Clean Energy & TechMulti-Region 20%
Climate SolutionsSenegal  
15 deals
Kenya
116 dealsUganda
31 deals
Tanzania
24 deals
South Africa
105 dealsEgypt 
36 dealsMorocco  
14 dealsTunisia
10 deals
Mozambique
7 dealsDR Congo
8 deals
Chad
2 deals
Zambia  
12 dealsCameroon 
10 deals33
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREFigure 10:  Share of Climate-Related Deal Value in Africa by Region and Category (US$mn); Top 3 
Countries By Value, 2002-2022 
Nigeria
US$302 mn
Ghana 
US$2719 mnSenegal  
US$280 mn
Kenya
US$1411 mnUganda
US$730 mn
Tanzania
US$171 mn
South Africa
US$2781 mnEgypt 
US$862 mnMorocco  
US$1114 mnTunisia
US$79 mn
Mozambique
US$215 mnDR Congo
US$11 mn
Chad
US$2 mn
Cameroon 
US$723 mnZambia  
US$155 mnNorth Africa 12%
Clean Energy & Tech
East Africa 17%
West Africa 25%
Clean Energy & Tech
Central Africa 5%
Clean Energy & Tech
Southern Africa 19%
Clean Energy & TechMulti-Region 22%Clean Energy & Tech
Clean Energy & Tech
* Please note that the top 3 countries highlighted in each region for Figures 9 and 10 exclude climate-related private capital 
deal volumes and values where recipient startups are headquartered in Africa, but operational in more than one country on 
the continent. Values that meet this criteria fall into the “Multi-Region” category.Climate Integration in African Private Capital
Driven by survey responses and in-depth interviews from 24 climate-focused investors, this section 
seeks to evaluate the degree of climate consciousness amongst private investors active on the 
continent to better understand if, and how, private capital is responding to the realities, risks and 
opportunities caused by anthropogenic climate change. 
5.1 Africa’s Climate Funds 
49 US$415 billion US$275 billion
Number of Private Capital 
Investors in Africa’s Climate 
EcosystemCollective Assets under 
Management (Globally)Collective Assets under 
Management (Africa)
49 private capital investors with approximately US$275 billion in collective assets under management 
are active in Africa’s climate ecosystem. As Figure 1 illustrates, the majority of assets in Africa’s 
climate funds are spread across the Low Carbon, Climate Conscious, Climate Solutions and Clean 
Energy & Tech categories. While innovative, Green Bonds have yet to penetrate Africa’s climate 
landscape to a significant degree for a number of reasons, including: the nascency of the continent’s 
capital markets; the high up-front and ongoing costs related to labelling, certification and reporting 
of green bonds; and challenges related to managing and tracking proceeds (discussed further in 
Section 3). Understandably, therefore, only climate-conscious or climate-focused private capital 
fund managers managing more than US$1 billion in assets have a climate investing strategy focusing 
on raising green bonds.
Figure 1:  Assets in Africa’ s Climate Funds by Climate Category*
Under US$100mn US$101mn - US$500mn US$500mn+
Clean Energy & Tech Climate Solutions Green Bonds Climate Conscious Low Carbon
* Please note survey respondents were encouraged to select all relevant categories that aligned with their climate investment strategy. 
Accordingly, in some instances the AUM above below may include respondents that selected more than one climate category as their strategy 
focus.
34
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE35
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE
5.2 Climate Awareness & Internal Buy-In 
48%
Almost half of the climate-conscious 
or climate-focused private capital fund 
managers surveyed have board or executive 
level engagement with climate matters on a 
quarterly basis. Climate investment policies at the firm level 
ought to outline how climate considerations will 
be integrated in the organisation’s governance 
mechanisms, structure, investment activities, 
and values. At the portfolio level, climate 
investment policies should also highlight 
how climate consideration will be applied 
throughout the investment lifecycle: from 
initial investment evaluation, to due diligence 
and value creation practices, and finally exit 
structures. Recognising the importance and advantages of having a clear direction for the integration 
of climate considerations into investment processes, 71% of survey respondents have developed an 
internal climate policy or action plan, while close to another fifth have similar plans underway. 
Given the rapidly evolving landscape and rising expectations for private capital related to climate, 
just over half of respondents that identified as having a climate policy in place also have internal 
leads or teams dedicated to climate to better integrate and establish the policy’s cross-functional 
integration within the organisation.  
Figure 2: Organisational Implementation of a Climate Investment Policy
Yes - we have a climate investment 
policy in place
We are currently developing a climate 
investment policy
No - we don't have a climate investment 
policy in place71% 10%
19%
Beyond creating and embedding climate 
considerations within business strategy and 
investment policies, these considerations 
need to be clearly registered and recognised 
as a Board responsibility for climate action 
to become fully incorporated into the firm’s 
investment processes and operations84. The 
United Nations Principles for Responsible 
Investment (UNPRI) note that private capital 
fund managers ought to demonstrate a 
systematic approach towards, and active management of, climate change risk assessment at both 
the fund and portfolio level. Good practice in this regard includes assigning accountability to a 
director to signal top-level intent and requiring a review of climate-related performance with senior 
management or the Board on an annual basis at minimum85. 
Regular senior management or board-level engagement with climate is also an indicator of the 
importance given to climate considerations and the degree of climate alignment amongst senior 
leadership. Engagement of this nature was largely strong amongst the private capital investors 
surveyed, where only 14% reported no board or executive engagement with climate. However, the 90%
of the climate-conscious or climate-  
focused private capital fund managers 
surveyed either have a climate investment 
policy in place, or are in the process of 
developing and instituting one. 36
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE70%
Private capital investors in Africa give equal 
countenance to both risk and opportunity in 
relation to climate change and its impact.frequency of engagement amongst those that do vary fairly significantly: 48% do so on a quarterly 
basis, while close to a quarter only do so on an annual basis.
Figure 3: Frequency of Board Engagement with Climate Matters
48%
14%
14%24%Quarterly Board or 
Executive Engagement 
with Climate
Annual Board or 
Executive Engagement 
with Climate
Bi-Annual Board or 
Executive Engagement 
with Climate
No Board or Executive 
Engagement with 
Climate 
0 10 20 30 40 50
5.3 Opportunities for Climate Investing 
Close to three quarters of respondents consider 
climate change from dual lens of both a source 
for risk mitigation and market opportunities. 
This is significantly higher than figures recorded 
in AVCA’s 2020 climate change survey, where 
only 53% of survey respondents held this 
view86. Only 12% of the climate-conscious or 
climate-focused private capital fund managers 
surveyed view climate change solely in terms of risk mitigation, down from 34% which held this view 
in 2020’s survey. The preceding indicates that private capital investors in Africa’s climate ecosystem 
are embracing a more multi-dimensional view of climate change and its impact, seeing it as not just 
a threat to asset and portfolio performance but also potentially an avenue for market opportunity to 
be part of the transition to Net-Zero and climate resilience.
Figure 4: Perceptions of Climate Change
Risk Mitigation Market Opportunities Both Equally12%18%70%37
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREWhile the planetary need for a global 
transition to a sustainable, low carbon future 
is undisputed, establishing a compelling 
commercial or business case is critical to 
mobilizing private sector investment for climate 
action. For climate focused investors, the 
business case for climate is readily apparent. 
However, for mainstream investors early in 
the process of integrating climate considerations into investment decision making, translating the 
importance of climate integration into financial metrics and making a strong business case that 
climate considerations are material is key to secure internal-buy at every level in for climate-related 
investments87. On a positive note, awareness of the significant commercial opportunity the low 
carbon transition presents is particularly high amongst survey respondents, four out of five of which 
believe there is a clear, compelling business case for climate investment in Africa.
Figure 5: The Business Case for Climate-Related Investment in Africa
Yes
No82%
18%
However, opinion is divided on the degree to which the continent is ready to leverage investment 
towards climate resilience, relative to its climate vulnerability. An equal proportion of respondents 
are of the opinion that Africa has a low-moderate readiness to capitalise on private investment in 
climate related companies, projects and assets, despite its disproportionate vulnerability to the 
adverse impacts of climate change. 
Only 6% of the climate-conscious or climate-focused private capital fund managers surveyed would 
categorise Africa’s readiness to leverage investment towards climate resilience as ‘high’ . This cohort 
identified Agriculture and Renewable Energy as the sector focus of their organisation’s climate-
related investments in Africa.
Figure 6:  Africa’ s Investment Readiness
47%
47%
6%24%Low Investment 
Readiness
Moderate Investment 
Readiness
High Investment 
Readiness82%
A significant majority of investors believe 
there is a strong business case and 
sufficient financial incentive for private 
investment in climate.38
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURERenewable Energy was selected by close 
to three quarters of survey respondents as 
having the most opportunities for climate 
investments in Africa, but investors also 
recognised the potential in Agriculture (47%) 
and Transportation (35%). The popularity of 
Renewable Energy for climate investing in 
Africa is unsurprising, given the wealth of solar, 
geothermal and wind resources available on 
the continent, and the legacy of renewables in 
Africa’s journey to electrification thus far.
The attractiveness of the Agriculture sector for climate investment is apt, given that several African 
economies are heavily dependent on rain-fed agriculture. The sector is central to the continent’s 
economic activity, accounting for 15% of Africa’s GDP , rising to 23% when localised to sub-Saharan 
Africa88. Solar-powered irrigation, crop insurance for farmers, regenerative agricultural practices to 
improve yields and technologies for soil fertility improvement, soil and water conservation have 
transformed the Agriculture value chain and played a catalytic role in the resurgence of investor 
interest in the sector from a climate lens.
Similarly, innovations in and the electrification of modern transportation are responsible for the 
fact that 35% of participants view Transportation as having the most opportunities for climate 
investment in Africa. The value-add of these innovations is enhanced by supportive public policy, 
such as in Kenya where the local government introduced reduced duty for electric vehicles with 
electric motors, with the Ministry of Transport also implementing an EV policy89.
However, while energy, agriculture and transportation might present the most obvious opportunities 
for climate smart investing, climate risks impact every sector. Recognising the need for climate 
action and improving awareness of the scope of climate conscious investment as a value creation 
opportunity has the potential to drive much needed capital into a variety of sectors and verticals to 
close the climate funding gap in Africa. 
Figure 7: Most Attractive Sectors For Climate Investment In Africa 
Rank
71% 1
47% 2
35% 3
29% 4
24% 5
24% 5
24% 5
6% 6
6% 6
6% 6
6% 6Renewable 
Energy
Sustainable 
Infrastructure
Clean 
Technology
Eco-Tourism
Heavy Industry
Sustainable 
Forests
WasteElectricity
WaterAgriculture
TransportationInvestors see climate-lens investing 
opportunities for Africa in Renewable 
Energy , Agriculture  and Transportation .39
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREA perceived lack of investment-ready, risk 
adjusted climate resilient projects with a 
commercial rate of return was identified by the 
largest cohort of survey respondents as a barrier 
preventing private investment in climate in 
Africa. This perception is unsurprising given the 
overwhelming majority of respondents that only 
placed the continent’s readiness to leverage 
investment towards climate resilience in the 
low-moderate category.
A high risk to return profile of climate-related 
investment opportunities was also identified by investors as an inhibitor of private capital in the 
industry. Of note, all of the survey respondents that hold this view also identified Renewable Energy 
as their sector focus for climate-related investments. Investing in renewables is often associated with 
elevated financial risk (inflation, exchange rate, capital transfer) and project risk (grid access, political 
risk, market access for independent power producers). However, it is likely that this perception of 
elevated risk will ebb in the medium-term future as blended finance mechanisms to de-risk climate 
investments and innovative products (such as first-loss protection or performance guarantees) 
become more prominent features in Africa’s climate ecosystem.
Notably, a knowledge barrier (i.e. limited private sector awareness of climate impact) was not 
a particularly strong concern for survey respondents, illustrating a generally strong perception 
of climate consciousness in Africa’s private sector. Similarly, the absence of universally adopted 
disclosure and reporting frameworks was only selected as a barrier to private investment in climate 
by 18% of those surveyed. This suggests that while this lack of uniformity is of some concern, it is 
not sufficient to deter private sector engagement in climate-related investments. 
Figure 8:  Barriers Preventing Private Investment in Climate
Limited investment-ready, risk adjusted climate 
resilient projects with a commercial rate of return
Limited decision-relevant data demonstrating the 
business case for climate investing
Limited institutional and technical capacity to identify 
and embed climate considerations in capital 
investment planning
Challenges securing internal buy-in on the commercial 
opportunity of climate related investmentsLimited private sector awareness of climate impact 
(speciﬁc risks and opportunities of climate change)
Absence of universally adopted and mandated 
disclosure and reporting frameworks, standards, and 
guidanceHigh risk to return proﬁle of climate-related 
investment opportunities
Unclear climate adaptation and mitigation policy 
objectives, strategies and commitments at the 
national level71%
53%
41%
35%
24%
24%
18%
6%5.4 Barriers to Climate Investing
Limited investment-
ready projects
A paucity of investment-ready projects; 
a high risk to return profile; and unclear 
climate response frameworks at the 
national level were the most salient barriers 
identified that prevent private investment 
in climate.40
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE53%
Close to two thirds of investors have a 
carbon footprint assessment for their 
entire portfolio or are in the process of 
doing so; while another 47% have, or are 
in the process of, undertaking climate risk 
assessments for their entire portfolio.Reflecting the difficulty of the exercise, only 
18% of the climate-conscious or climate-
focused private capital fund managers surveyed 
have a carbon footprint assessment for their 
entire portfolio. A carbon footprint measures 
the amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) released 
into the atmosphere as a result of the activities 
of an individual, organisation or community. 
Therefore, an organisational carbon footprint 
assessment quantifies the greenhouse gas 
emissions arising from its core activities over a 
defined period, reported in tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2e). However, the minority that 
have conducted this assessment do so on a regular basis, continually reassessing portfolio progress 
after the initial footprint exercise. A slightly higher proportion (29%) have conducted a climate-risk 
assessment for existing portfolio companies. Seperate to carbon footprint assessments, climate-
risk assessments are systematic processes that measure an organisation’s vulnerability to climate-
related impacts (both in the near and long term). The results of these assessment then enable the 
organisation to develop plans to avoid or manage these risks.
The largest group of survey respondents are those in the process of evaluating their portfolio’s 
carbon footprint (47%) and similarly those in the process of assessing the climate risk exposure 
of their portfolio (53%). This is a promising result and is evidence of increasing investor impetus to 
understand, manage, and subsequently mitigate against climate risk at the portfolio level as a tool 
for value creation.
Figure 9:  Investor Uptake Of Portfolio Carbon Footprint Assessments
18%
35%47%
Yes - we have a carbon footprint 
assessment for our entire portfolio
No - we do not have a carbon footprint 
assessment for our portfolio
We are in the process of assessing 
the carbon footprint of our portfolio5.5 Climate Risk Assessment & Portfolio Management 41
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREFigure 10:  Investor Uptake Of Portfolio Climate Risk Assessments
18%29%
53%
Yes - we have a climate-risk assessment 
for our entire portfolio
No - we do not have a climate-risk 
assessment for our portfolio
We are currently in the process of 
assessing the climate risk exposure 
of our portfolio
While only a minority of survey respondents 
have conducted a climate risk assessment 
for the entirety of their existing portfolio, 
the opposite is true for their prospective 
investments. 89% of participants conduct 
climate-risk and opportunity assessments for all 
or most of the new investments they consider, 
suggesting that investors are adopting more 
of a forward-looking approach towards the 
institutionalisation of climate risk assessments. 
For some of the 65% of survey respondents that assess every new investment, this process is also an 
informative exercise. Slightly over two thirds of this cohort have made changes to their investment 
strategy or decision-making based upon these assessment of climate risk, illustrating the iterative 
nature of climate investing which requires near constant revision and reformulation to keep pace 
with the rapidly evolving landscape private capital landscape related to climate. 
Figure 11: Climate-Risk And Opportunity Assessments For New Investments
24%65% 12%
Yes - we assess every new investment
Yes - we assess most new investments
No - we do not assess new investments9 out of 10
private capital investors surveyed 
always or mostly conduct climate-risk 
and opportunity assessments when 
considering new investments42
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE5.6 Goal Setting 
When asked about the development of short or long term climate goals with a corresponding climate 
action plan at both the firm and portfolio level, survey responses were close to evenly divided. At 
both the firm and portfolio level, the largest proportion have developed climate goals. However, the 
presence of short or long term climate goals with a corresponding climate action plan is more prevalent 
at the portfolio level (69%) than at the firm level (56%). This suggests that investors prioritise instituting 
climate resilience as a value creation strategy for their portfolio companies, with the concern to do the 
same across their own organisation only being of secondary or marginal importance.
Interestingly, however, is the preference exhibited by the climate conscious or climate-focused 
investors surveyed not to publish a climate report or make public disclosures on progress made 
towards achieving these goals. Only 35% of investors currently make public disclosures of their 
progress in achieving their organisation’s climate goals, with the remainder opting to eschew the 
pressures of public accountability by keeping these records internal to the organisation. 
Figure 12: Organisational Development Of Climate Goals 
Yes56%69%
44%
31%
NoAt the Firm Level
At the Portfolio Level
Figure 13: Public Disclosure Of Climate Goals
35% 65%
Yes
NoFrom devastating floods across West and Central Africa, increasing desertification and drought in 
East Africa, and dwindling water supplies in parts of Southern Africa, the effects of climate change 
are no longer a distant predicted future but an imminent and alarming reality. Understanding 
and addressing these risks, both present and future, is critical to the long-term resilience of our 
societies and economies. Section 6 outlines actionable insights and strategies for stakeholders in 
the policymaking, public and private sectors to incentivise climate investing and facilitate increased 
awareness of climate-related risk and opportunity within the operations, governance, and investment 
frameworks of these entities. 
6.1 Investor Recommendations
This section reflects on and summarises insights gleaned from the interviews conducted with climate 
conscious fund managers, drawing on wider research to highlight lessons learned, best practices 
and recommendations for aligning African private capital with the goals of the Paris Agreement and 
the Net-Zero Agenda and increasing climate integration in the industry.  
1) Challenges and Solutions
Interview respondents were asked to recount some of the challenges they encountered when 
incorporating climate considerations in investment strategies, which are featured and discussed in 
more depth in Chapter 4 of this report. Reflecting on these challenges, these fund managers at the 
forefront of climate investing in Africa highlighted practical actions private capital fund managers can 
take to better understand and address climate related risks and opportunities at three levels: in their 
own firms, across their target sectors, and across their existing investment portfolios. 
Understanding Climate Risk and Opportunity at the Firm Level
Recommendation:  Create an environment that enables the firm to evaluate 
risk and experiment with new ideas, approaches, and strategies to mitigate 
these risks in a safe and structured way.
“ Our US$250 million-target ARM-Harith Cities and Climate Transition Fund  was designed in 
collaboration with the Global Innovation Lab for Climate Finance. We applied to the accelerator 
before we begun fundraising, two years before we were ready with the Fund. However, we had 
such a robust outing by the time of market launch because we were part of an accelerator and 
able to test so much in that world. From a practical perspective, finding a way to experiment and 
test in a safe and structured environment is critical. Being proactive and dedicating resources to a 
new strategy even before it’s fully framed requires agility but gives organisations the ability and 
freedom to experiment with new ideas, approaches and strategies in a structured way. ”
 Tariye Gbadegesin,  Managing Director & Chief Executive Officer, ARM-Harith Infrastructure 
Investment 
43
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURESolutions & Strategies for The Future44
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREUnderstanding Climate Risk and Opportunity in Target Sectors
Recommendation:  Understanding the nature of climate-related impact is a 
complex exercise that can be simplified by taking a “sum of its parts” approach. 
Separate climate-related risks into two categories: material transition and 
physical risk, breaking each down even further into smaller buckets centred 
around core considerations.  
“ Understanding transition risk can be quite daunting – the questions are big and embedded within 
fast-moving legal, policy, technology and market dynamics, and it can be hard to know where to 
begin. Key to understanding and addressing climate risk is breaking down these bigger questions 
into much simpler ones at the fundamental level. What is the role of your investment in the energy 
transition, both in the short term (between now and 2030) and in the longer term (2030 to 2050)? 
What role will your target sector and its wider supply chain play in this transition – will they benefit 
from transition tailwinds, or are they fighting against it? Simply understanding the role that your 
investment, and the wider sector it is embedded in, may play will help you understand whether 
its value will appreciate or depreciate in the transition to a lower carbon economy. The answers 
to these questions may not be a straightforward yes or no – they’re more likely to be “yes” or 
“proceed with caution” sort of answers. Assessing transition risk is similar to FX forecasting in this 
way. Neither give definitive yes or no answers to any investment, but they may serve as really 
important factors in your decision making.“
 James Magor,  Sustainability Director, Actis
Understanding Climate Risk and Opportunity at the Portfolio Level 
Recommendation:  In addition to evaluating risk, appreciate the complexity of 
what a just transition can mean when assessing climate-related opportunities 
that factor into investment decision making.
“ Climate is a broad investable universe. There are parts where technology and business models 
have evolved to the point that what was once seen as the green premium has become the green 
discount – where innovation has created more sustainable solutions at lower prices. These are 
simply scalable businesses and opportunities, not just climate opportunities. There are industries 
raising billions of dollars that didn’t exist a few years ago. Look at those trends, understand those 
trends, and you will identify a whole host of investable business models that don’t need long time 
horizons and huge amounts of subsidies. 
 There is also need for a deeper and more nuanced appreciation of the complexity of what a 
just transition might mean in different portfolio companies, sectors and geographies. We need 
investors who are consciously trying to make better outcomes, investing across the spectrum. That 
means not only investing in traditionally green assets and companies that are already succeeding 
on the climate side, but also investing in the de-carbonisation of high-emitting industries and the 
companies that are creating change at the consumer level, to drive the consumption habits of the 
future. ”
 Phyl Georgiou, Head of Climate Strategy & Operations, LeapFrog Investments45
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE2) Climate Risk Assessment & Portfolio Management
Interview respondents were also asked about their portfolio management processes, and the 
degree of consideration given to assessing climate risks and opportunities in their investment 
processes at present. Compared to their peers, many of the fund managers interviewed for this 
report demonstrated increasingly mature investment approaches for the integration of ESG and 
climate considerations, with an excerpt of leading practice highlighted below.  
Recommendation:  Integrating a climate lens into due diligence, risk 
management and portfolio management processes cannot be a passive 
strategy. Embedding climate considerations should be treated as a deliberate 
and targeted action plan for both the fund and its portfolio.
“ For investments, it started with the flagship US$411 million AfricInvest Fund IV, a Pan African 
generalist fund targeting mid-cap companies. That’s where we started to behave differently, act 
deliberately, and put our money where our mouth was. Before we invested in any team with this 
fund, we committed to measure the company’s carbon footprint to establish a baseline, enabling 
us to track how much more carbon we were emitting into the environment, and whether we can 
reduce the carbon footprint. We also developed deliberate action around climate in our value 
creation plan, which we had never done before. Historically, our value creation strategies centred 
around commercial values, financial engineering values and governance values. But we have 
now integrated climate considerations and values into our value creation efforts for our portfolio, 
treating it as a very deliberate action and not a passive strategy. ” 
 George Odo,  Senior Partner & MD for East Africa, AfricInvest
When asked what tools, resources, or frameworks they relied on to conduct these climate 
assessments and reporting measures, interviewees identified the UN Principles for Responsible 
Investment (PRI), the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) and the UN 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). However, a selection of the climate-conscious fund 
managers interviewed for this project recommended customisation of these frameworks to ensure 
best-fit and maximum utility for climate investors in the African context. 
Recommendation:  Where possible, customise external climate risk assessment 
and reporting frameworks to your individual fund.
“ Frameworks and guidelines for the assessment of climate risk and opportunity are useful. Actis are 
long-term members of UNPRI and we derive a lot of value from our membership. However, if you 
want very detailed tools that inform the decision-making process and help explain those decisions 
to relevant stakeholders, then taking something off the shelf probably only does 50% of the job. 
These frameworks will still need to be made applicable to your individual fund for best results, 
and to ensure maximum practicality and utility for your teams. At Actis, we’ve had more success 
working with in house, bespoke tools that were developed with external expertise. We’ve gone 
further to create publicly available explainer videos to demonstrate how our tools work, because 
we think sharing what these tools are and how they inform our investment decisions removes 
ambiguity and generates investor and public confidence. ”
 James Magor, Sustainability Director, Actis46
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREExhibit 1: The Actis Transition Tool
CATEGORY DEFINITION ASSET TYPES
Green Assets that are aligned with Paris / the Net 
Zero transition •Renewable Power
 •Energy Storage
 •Electricity Transmission 
and Distribution
Olive Assets that have an important role in the 
next few decades while lower carbon 
alternatives are developed. Some olive 
assets will become obsolete and reduce in 
value, while others (smart olives) can be 
adapted to have a role in a low carbon world 
and will increase in value. •Transport Infrastructure
 •Digital Infrastructure
 •Buildings
 •Gas Power Plants
Non-Green Assets that are misaligned with Paris / the 
Net Zero transition •Coal Power Plants
 •Oil Production & 
Refineries
 •Oil Power Plant
(including any asset that 
solely and directly enables 
the above categories).
Source: Actis
“ Where you can get external data on an input basis, you should use it. And when assessing physical 
climate risk, which is harder to do internally because it requires huge datasets, then external 
climate risk reporting makes more sense. That said, because there is such a close alignment 
between climate impact and commercial success, a lot of the risk assessments you’re doing on 
both sides are the same. Take an investment in electric vehicles for example – you generate greater 
impact the more units you replace with electric vehicles, which also helps your bottom line and 
translates to commercial success. A lot of the understanding of a business, which is an important 
part of commercial due diligence, itself comes from the climate assessment, which is very detailed. 
Given that identifying the nexus of commerciality and climate impact is the very essence of what 
we’re trying to do as climate investors, developing an in-house climate reporting and assessment 
framework rather than outsourcing makes the most sense. On the other hand, one has to be open 
to using external inputs, because we recognise that integrating a parallel climate due diligence, 
assessment and reporting framework is resource intensive and a lot to ask of an internal team. ”
 Diana Fox Carney,  Chair of Climate, Energy Access and Resilience (CLEAR Fund), Helios 
3) Climate Policy, Internal Alignment and Goal Setting
Recognising the importance and advantages of having a clear direction for the integration of climate 
considerations into investment processes, interviewees were asked to give their perspectives on the 
most important practices fund managers should include or consider when developing an internal 
climate policy or action plan. 47
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURERecommendation:  Ensure your climate policy is science-based, considers the 
value of investing across the full spectrum of opportunity in the low-carbon 
transition, and accounts for regional variation in your investment geographies. 
“ The challenge we encountered when conceptualising our environmental and climate policy was 
capturing the reality that deals come in all shapes and sizes, and companies are in all different 
phases of their green evolution. It’s critical that  impact investors also play a role in the transition. 
If you only worry about the CO2 intensity of your AUM, then you would never invest in companies 
that have high emissions today. The greatest cost to people and planet comes from avoiding taking 
action in the sectors or markets where there is huge potential for abatement and, resultingly, value 
creation between now and 2050. Climate policies also need to account for geographic variation, 
particularly for climate-conscious investors with a wide geographic remit. What a just transition 
looks like in South Africa differs to what it looks like in Nigeria or Vietnam. There needs to be care to 
be balanced and context specific with the articulation of a climate investing policy.“
 Phyl Georgiou, Head of Climate Strategy & Operations, LeapFrog Investments
However, developing a climate policy is only the first step in the journey towards the integration of 
climate considerations in an organisation’s structure, values and human resources. More challenging 
is establishing the cross-functional integration of climate policy within the organisation, ensuring 
frequent and thorough engagement with it at both senior management level and throughout the 
organisation. The following are recommendations to ensure internal alignment and adoption of 
climate policy once it’s been instituted.
Recommendation:  Invest in firm-wide climate training to develop universal 
expertise within the organisation and allocate dedicated in-house climate 
leads or teams.
“ We’ve embarked in an institution-wide training on climate. We’ve already conducted a series of 
training that were compulsory for all the investment officers, and are now taking a smaller group 
into more specialised training to develop expertise within the team. We did this in the early days 
with ESG champions, and now we’re developing climate champions within the firm as well, who will 
be leading the battle from the front of the investment teams. ”
 George Odo,  Senior Partner & MD for East Africa, AfricInvest
Recommendation:  Climate investors should ensure the driving force of 
the organisation’s climate agenda comes from senior leadership. If there is 
demonstrable intent and a strategic adoption of a climate lens from the top, 
its strategic importance will eventually infiltrate throughout the organisation. 48
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE“ There are different ways to achieve cross-functional integration in an organisation. At its core, it’s 
more a business question than it is a climate question - how do you get an organisation to adopt new 
behaviours, new cultures, new technologies? If you’re a small team, knowledge sharing is key. Invite 
and encourage all staff to join climate-related webinars, working groups, and research events. Over 
time, as more people join in, listen, and participate, then climate awareness and consciousness 
will start to sink in. If you’re a larger organisation, another approach is to create a smaller team that 
become the organisation’s climate sustainability experts. But what is most important, whichever 
method is used, is demonstrable intent and strategic adoption from the top. For African private 
capital right now, it is one thing to see climate investing on the rails, and another entirely to adopt 
it, define a strategy works for you, and identify how to optimise yourself in this emerging context. 
What ought to be consistent in both small and large organisations is that the driving force of the 
climate agenda comes from senior leadership. The absolute will and conviction of senior leadership 
positioning climate as existential and fundamental to the core of the organisation forms concentric 
circles that ensures its strategic importance is continually expressed and infiltrated throughout the 
organisation. ”  
 Tariye Gbadegesin,  Managing Director & Chief Executive Officer, ARM-Harith Infrastructure 
Investment 
4) Summary of Best Practices
The table below provides a summary of the preceding recommendations and leading practice 
identified by interviewed fund managers, as well as those in supporting literature, for how the private 
capital industry can capitalise on the investment opportunities associated with Africa’s Net Zero 
transition whilst overcoming the systemic risk posed by climate change.
 •Create an environment that enables the firm to evaluate risk and experiment with new 
ideas, approaches, and strategies to mitigate these risks in a safe and structured way.
 •Adopt a “sum of its parts” approach to simplify the process of understanding and 
evaluating climate-related impact, distinguishing between material transition and 
physical risk.
 •Acknowledge the complexity of what a just transition can mean when assessing 
climate-related opportunities that factor into investment decision making. This includes 
engaging with high-emitting companies or those with a large carbon footprint to 
support their transition in addition to companies already offering low carbon solutions 
and technologies.UNDERSTANDING CLIMATE RISK AND OPPORTUNITY 49
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE •Embed evaluations of climate-related risk (both transition and physical) and opportunities 
into existing and new investments and throughout legal, investment and risk due 
diligence processes.
 •Establish a baseline carbon footprint for the entire portfolio at the outset, reassessing 
periodically to track performance and progress over time. 
 •Develop value creation strategies that engage and support portfolio companies in their 
efforts to build climate resilience and transition to low carbon models.
 •Make use of industry-leading frameworks and standards (such as the UNPRI or TCFD) to 
direct internal risk assessment and reporting activities and external engagement with 
portfolio firms. Where possible, customise these frameworks to your individual fund.
 •Create an internal climate policy or action plan (either standalone or embedded within 
a wider ESG framework), ensuring that it is reviewed and updated on a regular basis. 
 •Set short- and long-term science-based climate targets for both the firm and the fund, 
developing a corresponding climate action plan for their implementation*.
 •Prioritise regular senior management or board-level engagement with climate through 
the creation of climate-dedicated board committees and/or leads that review climate-
related performance of the firm and the fund on an annual basis at minimum**.
 •Invest in firm-wide climate training (i.e., board, senior management, and investment 
teams) to develop universal expertise within the organisation, allocating dedicated in-
house climate leads or teams.
 •Align investment practices with the objectives of existing and emerging global climate 
action targets (such as those outlined in the Paris Agreement), including portfolio-wide 
carbon neutrality by 2050 or earlier*. 
* Source: Ceres Sustainable Institute
**  Source: UNPRICLIMATE RISK ASSESSMENT & PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT
CLIMATE POLICY, INTERNAL ALIGNMENT AND GOAL SETTING50
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE6.2 Policy Recommendations
In light of the challenges to fostering climate finance presented in Section 2 of this report, we 
recommend that governments should consider the following approaches and ideas to plug 
institutional capacity and knowledge gaps, ensure better streamlining of public finances towards the 
climate change issue, and aligning Official Development Assistance (ODA) with innovative “green 
growth” opportunities.
Governments should plug institutional capacity and knowledge gaps regarding 
climate change
To overcome institutional capacity challenges in bolstering climate finance, governments should 
seek to ensure that they have the necessary knowledge needed to make climate-related decisions. 
This can be achieved by embedding climate action and climate finance advisors within ministries. 
These advisors will serve as subject-matter experts for government officials and ensure that climate 
decisions remain technically sound. For example, considering that governments continue to 
subsidise fossil fuels at the expense of the environment and other cleaner forms of energy, such 
advisors can ensure that such energy subsidies are better aligned with climate change risks (i.e., 
how and when should fossil fuels be subsidised). The cross-cutting nature of climate action and 
climate finance work can also help governments realise that climate change is an issue of national 
development and not merely an environmental one and thus requires coordinated multi-ministry 
efforts.  The establishment of ‘Climate Delivery Labs (CDLs)’ can also help bolster climate project 
delivery efforts in this regard. CDLs focus on the potential implementation barriers and provide 
advice on the necessary interventions needed for these barriers to be overcome. Other institutional-
level improvement includes standardising and streamlining processes for climate financing, together 
with having mechanisms in place for allocating windfalls to vulnerable communities.
Additionally, given that the lack of climate-related information at the local level further hinders the 
government’s ability to make fully-informed decisions, governments should actively build up citizen 
knowledge by publicising the effects of climate change on society. This can be done by supporting 
the establishment and operations of institutions to inform citizens  regarding the sector-agnostic 
nature of climate change. Enabling citizen involvement on climate change through civic engagement 
initiatives helps provide a pool of ‘local expertise’ in which governments can tap upon in policy 
design90.
Governments should adopt a ‘ green budgeting ’ approach to public finance 
management
In order to ensure that national budgets are properly utilised for climate financing, governments 
should consider the adoption of green budgeting, otherwise known as climate budgeting or green 
public finance management (GPFM). Green budgeting broadly involves greater integration of climate 
change with a country’s public finance management91. This integration should be closely aligned 
with a country’s national context and process and intended to be a gradual process.
While we recognise that different African countries might have different approaches and capacities 
in Public Finance Management (PFM), governments should nonetheless start by clearly outlining 
strategic priorities pertaining to climate change to better help guide public spending decisions. 
This should be an inclusive process that engages relevant stakeholders and pools together their 
collective expertise and knowledge. Climate change and national climate policies tend to have 
unequal effects on different societal segments. Tools for climate-responsive budgeting such climate 
public expenditure and institutional reviews (CPEIRS), damage assessments, and fiscal incident 
analysis could be utilised to improve national budgeting92.51
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREGovernment should also (re-)orient their national accounting and financial reporting systems to 
better capture relevant financial data that is related to climate change - a process known as “green 
budget tagging” . There are various green budgeting resources made available by international 
organisations like the World Bank, IMF, UNDP , and OECD93 94. Benefits that arise from green budget 
tagging include allowing countries to improve their climate budgeting monitoring and evaluation 
systems as well as complementing other policy levers such as climate change regulations95. For the 
medium- to long-term, this can help the government better streamline its finances and explore ways 
in which additional public finances can be allocated to support areas such as climate research and 
innovation. Adopting green public finance management also strengthens the government’s ability 
to bolster its green finance architecture and fostering more private sector climate investing.
Align official development assistance with innovative and inclusive “ green growth ” 
opportunities
Given that contributions by international development aid agencies is one of the sources of climate 
financing, governments should seek to ensure that development aid is aligned with innovative 
and inclusive green growth opportunities. Aligning official development assistance (ODA) with 
innovative and inclusive “green growth” opportunities is also a sensible move considering various 
global developments – such as the Global Green Growth Institute (GGGI) partnership with the African 
Development Bank96, or the OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC)’s announcement that 
it will ‘align development co-operation with the goals of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change’97. 
To do so, governments should utilise funds (e.g., Special Climate Change Fund98 and the Least 
Developed Countries Fund)99 made available by agencies such as the Global Environment Facility 
to co-finance innovative national and regional projects in support of climate change response. 
Additionally, countries should also take advantage of climate funding accelerator programs hosted 
by international development agencies to drive national climate innovation. These programs include 
the IMF Climate Innovation Challenge100, GEF Challenge Program for Adaptation Innovations101, 
UNDP-UNICEF Green Shark Challenge102 as possible funding avenues for bolster their climate 
innovation. Countries will also do well to utilise the Technology Facilitation Mechanism (TFM)103 as 
established through the 2015 Addis Ababa Action Agenda (AAAA)104. The TFM organises the annual 
Multi-Stakeholder Forum on Science, Technology, and Innovation for the SDGs (STI Forum) which 
enables countries to benefit from knowledge-sharing and technology-transfer for climate innovation 
and technologies. The AAAA’s framework also outlines key action areas on guiding climate financing 
(as part of wider financing for development initiatives, otherwise known as FfD) towards climate 
innovation.
Policy Recommendations: 
Governments should plug institutional 
capacity and knowledge gaps regarding 
climate change
Governments should adopt a ‘green 
budgeting’ approach to public finance 
management
Align official development assistance with 
innovative and inclusive “green growth” 
opportunities52
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTUREEndnotes
1 United Nations Environment Programme, 2023. Climate Action: Mitigation
2 United Nations Climate Change, 2023. Adaptation and Resilience
3 United Nations Climate Change, 2023. Introduction to Climate Change
4 OECD. Development Finance Institutions: Profitability Promoting Development
5 Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, 2023. Development finance institutions
6 Africa NDC Hub, 2021.  Africa’s NDC Journey And The Imperative For Climate Finance  
7 The World Bank, 2021. Climate Change Could Further Impact Africa’s Recovery, Pushing 86 Million Africans to Migrate Within Their Own 
Countries by 2050  
8 World Population Review, 2023. Carbon Footprint by Country
9 Statista, 2023. Africa’s share in global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from 2000 to 2020
10 Climate Policy Initiative, 2021. Global Landscape of Climate Finance 2021
11 Oxfam, 2020. Climate Finance Shadow Report 2020: Assessing Progress Towards The $100 Billion Commitment
12 OECD, 2021. Statement by the OECD Secretary-General on Future Levels of Climate Finance
13 All Africa, 2022. Rwanda: National Budget to Focus on Private Sector Development, Climate Change Mitigation  
14 The Herald, 2022. Zimbabwe Needs US$7,88 billion to Tackle Climate Change by 2030
15 White House Briefing Room, 2022. Quantifying Risks to the Federal Budget from Climate Change
16 African Development Bank, 2022. African Economic Outlook 2022: Supporting Climate Resilience and a Just Energy Transition in Africa
17 United Nations Environmental Programme, 2016. The Adaptation Finance Gap Report
18 PwC, 2020. The State of Climate Tech 2020: The Next Frontier for Venture Capital
19 Climate Policy Initiative, 2022. The State of Climate Finance in Africa: Climate Finance Needs of African Countries
20 Climate Policy Initiative, 2022. The State of Climate Finance in Africa: Climate Finance Needs of African Countries
21 African Development Bank, 2022. African Economic Outlook 2022: Supporting Climate Resilience and a Just Energy Transition in Africa
22 Foresight Africa Blog, 2021. Capacity Building for Enhanced Climate Action in Africa  
23 Mungai, E., Ndiritu, S. and Da Silva, I., 2022. Unlocking Climate Finance Potential and Policy Barriers—A Case of Renewable Energy and 
Energy Efficiency in Sub-Saharan Africa  
24 Schwerhoff, G. and Mouhamadou, S., (2017). Financing Renewable Energy in Africa – Key Challenge of The Sustainable Development 
Goals
25 World Bank, 2021. Enabling Private Investment in Climate Adaptation & Resilience: Current Status, Barriers to Investment and Blueprint for 
Action
26 Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures, 2022. 2022 Status Report
27 Overland et. al (2022). Funding flows for climate change research on Africa: where do they come from and where do they go? Climate and 
Development.
28 University World News. Lack of data compromises research on climate change
29 Mo Ibrahim Foundation, 2022. The Road  to COP27: Making Africa’s Case in the Climate Debate
30  World Bank, 2022. Green, Social, and Sustainable Bonds to Serve Africa’s Sustainable Investment Needs  
31 The Guardian, 2022. African Ministers Commit To End Open Dumping, Waste Burning  
32 United Nations Environment Programme, 2019. Africa Environment Ministers To Accelerate Action On Pressing Continental Environment 
Challenges  
33 East African Community, 2022. EAC Climate Change Policy Framework
34 Afrik21, 2022. Benin: The Country’s First Solar Power Plant (25 MWp) Goes Operational in Illoulofin
35 Republic Of Burundi Ministry of Environment, Agriculture & Livestock, 2019. Third National Communication on Climate Change  
36 McKinsey & Co., 2019. Winning in Africa’s Agricultural Market 
37 United Nations Environment Programme, 2022. The Race To Save Zambia’s Wetlands
38 Eritrea Ministry of Information, 2020. Restoring the Ecosystem of Eritrea
39 United Nations Environment Programme, 2022 . Ecosystem-based Adaptation in Rwanda
40 Asian Development Bank, 2015.  Ecosystem-based Approaches to Address Climate Change Challenges in the Greater Mekong Subregion
41 Al Jazeera, 2016. Climate change and ‘Smart Seeds’ in Africa  
42 United Nations Environment Programme, 2021. Zambia Turns to Nature to Tackle Climate Change
43 United Nations Botswana, 2016. Botswana: National Development Plan (NDP) 11
44 Zimbabwe Ministry of Environment, Water and Climate, 2015.  Zimbabwe’s National Climate Change Response Strategy, 2015, page 56 .
45 United Nations Framework Convention On Climate Change, 2022. COP27 Reaches Breakthrough Agreement on New “Loss and Damage” 
Fund for Vulnerable Countries
46 United Nations Framework Convention On Climate Change, 2023. Africa Carbon Markets Initiative Announces 13 Action Programs
47 Bloomberg, 2022. Biggest Win Yet at COP27? Calls to Reform Multilateral Lenders
48 Climate Policy Initiative, 2022. The State of Climate Finance in Africa: Climate Finance Needs of African Countries
49 Climate Policy Initiative, 2022. The State of Climate Finance in Africa: Climate Finance Needs of African Countries
50 African Development Bank, 2022. Climate Change in Africa
51 European Investment Bank (EIB), 2022. 2021 Joint Report on Multilateral Development Banks’ Climate Finance
52 African Development Bank, 2022. African Economic Outlook 2022: Supporting Climate Resilience and a Just Energy Transition in AfricaClick Here to Access Report 
Annex & Supplementary Data53
CLIMATE FINANCING IN AFRICA: STRATEGIES FOR THE FUTURE53 OECD, 2022. Aggregate Trends of Climate Finance Provided and Mobilised by Developed Countries in 2013-2020.  Please note the OECD 
defines private climate finance as capital mobilised by grants, loans, mezzanine/hybrid finance, equity and developmental guarantees by 
bilateral and multilateral climate finance institutions. 
54 Morningstar, 2021. Investing in Times of Climate Change: A Global View of the Expanding Choice Available to Climate-Aware Investors
55 Africa Outlook, 2022. The Need for Private Sector Investment into Renewable Energy
56 African Private Equity and Venture Capital Association, 2022. Industry Quarterly Review: Q2, 2022
57 Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development (BMZ), 2021. The Renewable Energy Transition in Africa Powering Access, 
Resilience and Prosperity
58 Africa Renewal, 2021. Push For Renewables: How Africa Is Building A Different Energy Pathway
59 African Development Bank, 2022. Climate Investment Funds
60 AfricInvest, 2022. AfricInvest Impact Outlook 2022
61 LeapFrog Investments, 2022. Press Release: LeapFrog Launches Climate Investment Strategy
62 LeapFrog Investments, 2022. Press Release: LeapFrog Launches Climate Investment Strategy
63 Disrupt Africa, 2021. Meet The African Companies Making Pioneering Strides in the Carbon Credits Space
64 United Nations Framework Convention On Climate Change, 2022. Africa Carbon Markets Initiative Launched
65 OECD, 2015. Green Bonds: Mobilising The Debt Capital Markets For A Low-Carbon Transition
66 Stokholm Sustainable Finance Center, 2020. Scoping the Sustainable Finance Landscape in Africa: The Case of Green Bonds
67 This figure is based on AVCA analysis of data from a range of sources, including the African Development Bank, FSD Africa and the 
Climate Bonds Initiative.
68 World Bank, 2022. Green, Social, and Sustainable Bonds to Serve Africa’s Sustainable Investment Needs
69 FSD Africa, 2020. Africa Green Bond Toolkit
70 African Development Bank, 2022. African Economic Outlook 2022: Supporting Climate Resilience and a Just Energy Transition in Africa
71 Clifford Chance, 2022. Clifford Chance Advises Genser Energy
72 Gridworks, 2022. Gridworks to Invest up to US$50 million in Virunga Power
73 Serengeti Energy, 2022. Additional USD 80 million Investment in renewable Energy for sub-Saharan Africa
74 CrossBoundary Energy Access, 2022. CrossBoundary Energy Access Raises $25 Million
75 Sistema.Bio, 2022. New Investment to Scale Impact
76 BBOXX, 2022. Press Release
77 BBOXX, 2022. Press Release
78 Aceleron, 2022. Press Release
79 Clean Cooking Alliance, 2022. Spark+ Invests US $4 Million in BURN to Accelerate Its Multi-Country Expansion Across Africa
80 Climate Policy Initiative, 2022. Landscape of Climate Finance in Africa
81 African Development Bank, 2022. Kenya Economic Outlook
82 AVCA, 2022. African Private Capital Activity Report
83 Climate Policy Initiative, 2021. South African Climate Finance Landscape 2020
84 Guernsey Green Finance, 2020. Green Private Equity Principles: A Guide to Best Practice For GPs
85 UNPRI, 2016. A Guide On Climate Change For Private Equity Investors
86 AVCA, 2020. Raising the Heat: Exploring Climate-Consciousness in African Private Equity
87 Ceres, 2021. The Changing Climate for Private Equity
88 Oxford Business Group and AVCA, 2020. Private Equity & Venture Capital in Africa: Covid-19 Response Report
89 Briter Bridges, 2022. Adapt, Mitigate, And Grow: Climate Tech Innovation In Africa
90 Albagli, S., and Iwama, A.Y., 2022. Citizen Science And The Right To Research: Building Local Knowledge Of Climate Change Impacts
91 United Nations Development Programme, 2021. Budgeting for Climate Change: A Guidance Note for Governments to Integrate Climate 
Change into Budgeting
92 United Nations Development Programme, 2021. Budgeting for Climate Change: A Guidance Note for Governments to Integrate Climate 
Change into Budgeting
93 OECD, 2021. Green Budget Tagging: Introductory Guidance & Principles
94 World Bank. 2021. Climate Change Budget Tagging : A Review of International Experience
95 IMF Public Financial Management Blog, 2021. A New Game of Tag for Climate and Environmental Objectives
96 African Development Bank and the Global Green Growth Institute, 2022. Africa Green Growth Readiness Assessment
97   OECD, 2021. OECD DAC Declaration on a New Approach to Align Development Co-Operation with the Goals of The Paris Agreement on 
Climate Change
98 Global Environment Facility, 2022. Accessing Resources Under The Special Climate Change Fund
99   United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2023. Least Developed Countries (LDC) Fund
100  IMF, 2021. Climate Innovation Challenge
101  Funds for NGOs, 2021. Call for Proposals for 2nd Round of $10M Challenge Program for Adaptation Innovation
102  UNICEF Innovation, 2022. Three Transformational Solutions To Tackle Climate Change  
103  United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2023. UN Technology Facilitation Mechanism (TFM): Harnessing Science, 
Technology and Innovation to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals  
104  United Nations, 2015. Addis Ababa Action Agenda  Championing Private Investment in Africa Working with political leaders to drive change
The African Private Capital Association is the pan-
African industry body which promotes and enables 
private investment in Africa.
AVCA plays an important role as a champion and 
effective change agent for the industry, educating, 
equipping and connecting members and stakeholders 
with independent industry research, best practice 
training programmes and exceptional networking 
opportunities.
With a global and growing member base, AVCA 
members span private equity and venture 
capital firms, institutional investors, foundations 
and endowments, pension funds, international 
development finance institutions, professional 
service firms, academia, and other associations.
This diverse membership is united by a common 
purpose: to be part of the Africa growth story.We are the Tony Blair Institute for Global Change. 
We work with political leaders around the world to 
drive change. We help governments turn bold ideas 
into reality for their people. We do it by advising on 
strategy, policy and delivery, unlocking the power 
of technology across all three. By sharing what we 
learn on the ground, so everyone can benefit. And 
we do it to build more open, inclusive and prosperous 
countries for people everywhere. If you believe politics 
done well has the power to transform lives, we invite 
you to partner with us, explore our insights or join our 
team. Together we can build a better future.AVCA Contributors:
Nadia Kouassi Coulibaly  
Head of Research
Paulette Mbeya  
Research & Advocacy AssociateTony Blair Institute Contributors:
Blaise Bayuo  
Policy Lead
Kenddrick Chan  
Senior Policy Analyst
DISCLAIMER 
AVCA refers to the African Private Equity and Venture Capital Association Limited, a company limited by guarantee 
registered in the United Kingdom. AVCA is a pan-African industry body whose international members include private 
equity and venture capital firms, institutional investors, foundations, endowments, international development institutions 
and professional services firms. The views expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of AVCA’s 
board of directors, advisory council or members. This publication has been prepared on the basis of data sourced 
from AVCA’s database, which contains information from public sources and private equity firms that has not been 
independently verified by AVCA. The database is constantly updated, and as such historical and current data may change 
as new information becomes available. AVCA takes no responsibility for the accuracy or completeness of the information, 
projections or opinions included in this publication, and neither AVCA nor any of its members or related third parties shall 
be responsible for any loss whatsoever sustained by any person who relies on this publication. AVCA encourages personal 
and non-commercial use of this publication with proper acknowledgment of AVCA. Users are restricted from reselling, 
redistributing, or creating derivative works for commercial purposes without the express written consent of AVCA.E avca@avca-africa.org
W  www.avca.africa
C www.avcaconference.com
T +44 (0)20 3874 7008Contact AVCA
37 North Row
3rd Floor
London W1K 6DH

Extracted from: 02115-avca-kifc-funds-report_13-part2.pdf
Funds and Fund 
Management 
Services in  
Africa
Part 2
Research 
PartnerMARCH 2023Contents
Section 3: Doing Business for Funds and Fund  
Management Services in Africa 3
An International Benchmark of Key Financial Centres Servicing Africa 4
Competitive Advantages of Financial Centres Servicing Africa 33
Spotlight on Kigali International Financial Centre 36
Challenges 44
Section 4: Future of Funds and Fund Management  
Services in Africa 45
Best Practices for the Development of Funds and Fund Management  
in Africa 46
Lessons Learned & Recommendations: Experts’ View 59
Outlook on the Future Development of Financial Centres Servicing Africa 60
Section 5: Benchmark Analysis of Key Financial  
Centres and Markets Servicing Africa - Regulatory,  
Legal, and Tax environment 62
An Overview of Other Key Markets in Africa 63
2
Doing Business 
for Funds 
and Fund 
Management 
Services in 
Africa
3Africa’s private capital industry obviously bodes well for the jurisdictions which host 
their funds. The growth of the industry is accompanied by deepening sophistication: 
fund management is increasing in complexity as firms manage larger portfolios and 
pursue different strategies across multiple jurisdictions. As private capital firms are 
becoming more diverse and have several strategic and operational decisions to make, 
choosing partners – including a suitable fund domicile – is critical to their success. 
Supportive infrastructure is therefore a fundamental concern for fund managers, 
which seek jurisdictions where regulation is consistent, low risk, and with an adequate 
degree of investor protection. The jurisdiction should, on the one hand, adhere to 
the highest standards of international tax, regulation, and transparency around fund 
operations, and on the other hand allow access to legal services, compliance and 
company secretary services, and fund administration services.
This section opens with an overview of the International Financial Centres (IFCs) available on the continent; providing 
an analysis of their activities and the support services offered in comparison with their international counterparts. It 
follows with an overview of the current business and legislative landscape in some key African markets, as well as an 
overview of the main challenges associated with the formation and operation of funds and fund services providers 
on the continent. 
An International Benchmark of Key Financial 
Centres Servicing Africa
Overview of Financial Centres
While most of fund managers investing in Africa use 
offshore jurisdiction to domicile their funds1, onshoring is 
increasingly popular as fund managers are seeking new 
jurisdictions, a base where the fund or fund manager 
has actual economic substance. Onshore jurisdictions 
have developed, and new fund structure products have 
been launched to attract more pooling of funds.
This report looks at African financial centres and their 
international counterparts: Kenya, Morocco, Rwanda, 
South Africa, Jersey, Mauritius, Saudi Arabia, UAE. 
Although all pursue the same purpose - facilitating the 
flow of international investments – they have structural 
differences and offer various services and products. 
Several initiatives exist to profile, assess and rank 
IFCs. The Global Financial Centre Index (GFCI) rates 
119 cities into five areas of competitiveness: business 
environment, human capital, infrastructure, financial 
sector development and reputation2. The Tax Justice 
Network assesses 141 jurisdictions regarding their 
financial secrecy and the scale of their offshore financial 
activities using the Financial Secrecy Index. Among the selected financial centres, Dubai is the 
sole jurisdiction classified as Global as it has strong 
connections with leading global financial centres and 
wide connections with other centres across the world. 
With a deep expertise in financial services activities, 
it ranks first in the region Middle East and Africa, and 
17th globally. On the continent, Casablanca leads the 
onshore financial centres and provides deep expertise 
in specific activities. Johannesburg which ranks second 
on the list of onshore financial centres, offers a broad 
range of financial activities and has the best (i.e., lowest) 
score in terms of financial secrecy under the Financial 
Secrecy Index ranking. Jersey which ranks 60th in 
the GFCI globally and 3rd among the financial centres 
surveyed has the highest share of financial services 
supplied to residents of other countries indicated by the 
Global Scale Weight; in Africa, Johannesburg ranks first.
4
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaConnectivity
Diversity
Speciality
GFCI Rank
GFCI Rank Region*
Financial Secrecy Index 
Global Scale Weight/puzzle
⋆
/ranking-star
/earth-africa
/money-bill
/weight-scale/globeCasablanca
International
Relatively Deep
Specialised54
4
66
0.01%/puzzle
⋆/ranking-star
/earth-africa
/money-bill
/weight-scale/globeJersey
International
Relatively Deep
Specialised60
N/A
63
0.58%/puzzle
⋆/ranking-star
/earth-africa
/money-bill
/weight-scale/globe
Johannesburg
International
Relatively Broad
Diversiﬁed65
7
60
0.18%/puzzle
⋆/ranking-star
/earth-africa
/money-bill
/weight-scale/globeKigali
International
Relatively Deep
Specialised100
11
72
0.00%/puzzle
⋆/ranking-star
/earth-africa
/money-bill
/weight-scale/globeDubai
Global
Relatively Deep
Specialised17
1
79
0.22%/puzzle
⋆/ranking-star
/earth-africa
/money-bill
/weight-scale/globeRiyadh
International
Relatively Deep
Specialised98
10
69
0.13%/puzzle
⋆/ranking-star
/earth-africa
/money-bill
/weight-scale/globe
Nairobi
International
Emerging
Contender105
12
67
0.09%/puzzle
⋆/ranking-star
/earth-africa
/money-bill
/weight-scale/globe
Mauritius
International
Emerging
Contender92
9
70
0.02%/puzzle
⋆/ranking-star
/earth-africa
/money-bill
/weight-scale/globeProfile of Key International Financial Centres
Source: GFCI 32, Financial Secrecy Index, Global Scale Weight, FSI Share 2022 (The Tax Justice Network)
*Middle East and Africa  
5
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaQ&A
with Lamia Merzouki | Vice-Chair / Directrice Generale 
Adjointe
World Alliance of International Financial Centers / 
Casablanca Finance City
1) What are the biggest achievements of the Casablanca Finance City since its creation? Can you 
talk us through this journey and highlight the main milestones and achievements? 
Casablanca Finance City (CFC) is a pan-African financial center launched in 2010 by the country’s authorities. 
As a pivotal component of the country’s development strategy, CFC has been established as a key regional 
business and financial hub targeting the next center of global growth: Africa. Since CFC’s inception, we have 
put in place the legal, regulatory and tax frameworks, and we have successfully built a top-level business 
community of over 200 international and local professionals. This community gathers financial institutions, 
multinational corporations, professional service providers, holding companies, and has a strong continental 
footprint with 50 countries being covered from Casablanca’s platform. 
We have also developed a dense network of international partnerships with 15 international financial centres 
-such as London, Singapore, Toronto, Abu Dhabi-, and we have signed MoUs with African authorities in charge 
of investments promotion. CFC is also a founding member of the UN’s Financial Centers for Sustainability 
network (FC4S) & World Alliance of International Financial Centers (WAIFC). Finally, over the years, we have 
expanded the real estate district of Casablanca Finance City, as the Moroccan authorities dedicated 100 ha 
(hectare) at the heart of the City.
2) What has your role been in facilitating international investment and cross-border transactions 
for the private capital fund managers making use of your jurisdiction?
CFC offers through its dedicated Capital Flows regulation an extensive freedom of foreign exchange. This 
has facilitated both consolidation (through the repatriation of dividends) and investment flows throughout the 
African continent.
Moreover, our African Cooperation efforts are primarily focused on promoting regional integration within the 
continent along with facilitating deal making across a wide array of vital sectors such as infrastructure, energy, 
and education.
3) Your jurisdiction ranks 54th on the Global Financial Centres Index, which measures the 
competitiveness of financial centres globally. What do you attribute your strong performance 
and ranking to, and how have you positioned yourselves to become more significant to relevant 
stakeholders over time? 
In 2014, CFC joined the Global Financial Centre Index (GFCI), and since 2016, it ranks as the leading financial 
centre in Africa, and 54th worldwide. Casablanca’s performance is built on several key assets, including:
• Morocco’s intrinsic assets: its political stability, a world-class infrastructure, a dense connectivity (Casablanca 
is the number 1 air hub between Europe and Africa), a robust regulation, an available talent pool with highly 
skilled human capital, and institutional partnerships frameworks such as double tax avoidance treaties & 
investment protection agreements.
• CFC’s competitive advantages: an attractive value proposition with doing business incentives, ‘one-stop-
shop’ & administrative fast tracks (e.g., company setup, visas & work permits), a vibrant business community 
with a proven African expertise and strong continental presence, along with dense network of international 
6
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africapartners. Casablanca Finance City has signed partnerships with major financial centers, which cover various 
cooperation axes and have helped CFC in its development and its commitment to align its offer with the best 
international standards. 
4) Earlier this year, a report commissioned by DIFC discussing the future of IFCs highlighted 
4 main challenges (Drawing and retaining the best talent; How to cope with the changing 
demographics; Sustainability challenge including the risk posed by climate change; Technological 
innovation in digital service). What are your thoughts on these, and which would you say apply 
to your jurisdiction?  What strategies have you implemented (or are in progress) to address these 
challenges?
As a founding member of the World Alliance of International Financial Centers, we worked with DIFC and 
other IFCs on this report which is dedicated to the future of financial centers. We unanimously believe that the 
Financial Center of the future should be:
1. Green by easing the transition towards net zero economies.
2. Smart by embracing increasingly complex technology to unlock new business opportunities and offer 
improved services. 
3. Innovative and customer centric by putting in place a conducive business environment. 
4. Digital by fostering digital transformation.
5. Inclusive by holistically servicing all segments and communities.
Financial Centers in Africa should be crafted around these prerequisites to develop a more resilient, inclusive, 
and sustainable future for the continent.
7
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaQ&A
with Mr Nicolas Mackel | CEO
Luxembourg For Finance
1) What are the biggest achievements of the Luxembourg Financial Centre since its creation? Can 
you talk us through this journey and highlight the main milestones and achievements? 
Luxembourg is the seat of several EU institutions, eurozone’s premier financial hub and a global 
center of excellence for wealth management and investment funds. The Luxembourg financial 
centre holds a competitive position at the international level. The financial sector is the country’s 
top contributor to the economy. It is the second-largest investment fund centre in the world after the 
United States, the premier captive reinsurance market in the European Union and the leading private 
banking centre in the eurozone. It is strategically located too being at the heart of Western Europe: it 
provides a complete range of services to both private and institutional investors.  Another key feature 
of Luxembourg is its rapid and pragmatic implementation of regulation coupled with an efficient 
application of the highest standards in finance supervision and investor protection (Sophisticated 
corporate law: unique toolbox of investment vehicles coupled with a unique modern securitization 
law. 
Our key achievements include being the first to implement the UCITs directive into national law 
in 1985, list a Green Bond worldwide in 2007, regulate the family office industry, regulate virtual 
currency operators and license to a digital currency exchange. Luxembourg is among the top 
10 global leaders in terms of ICT infrastructure, and ranked first in ‘fintechs founded, per million 
capita in 2021’ and second in ‘deals per million capita’ by McKinsey. Luxembourg has 34% share in 
Europe for ESG fund assets. Other achievements worth highlighting include: our collaboration with 
China through large delegations including LFF, MinFin and HRH Crown Prince Guillaume resulted 
in several Chinese banks (China Everbright and Shanghai Pudong Development Bank) setting up 
their continental European hub in Luxembourg;  and the MoU signed between LFF and the City of 
Shanghai to strengthen the ties between both financial centers, LFF being a board member of WAIFC 
(World Alliance of International Financial Centers) and LFF being a founding member of the UN’s 
Financial Center for Sustainability (FC4S).
2) What has your role been in facilitating international investment and cross-border transactions 
for the private capital fund managers making use of your jurisdiction?
Luxembourg offers a platform of services and structuring opportunities to the private equity 
as well as the venture capital industry. Our specific role has been to provide awareness of the 
Luxembourg ecosystem, ensure familiarity to financial institutions of the range of vehicles available 
for fund structuring in Luxembourg and accelerate firms’ implementation of such structures through 
connections into the local FS ecosystem in Luxembourg.
8
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africa3) From your experience and engagement with industry stakeholders, what are the key challenges 
associated with the formation and operation of funds and fund services providers both in your 
jurisdiction and in Africa?
The main challenge facing private equity investors in many African jurisdictions is that markets 
are generally not ready for the sophistication required for a private equity transaction market. The 
current trend of private equity firms shying away from emerging market investments due to the 
current risk-on environment adds to the overall shortage. Another challenge is associated with the 
different legal systems, language, cultural and religious backgrounds of many, the huge impact that 
colonization had on Africa, makes investments in Africa more challenging as you cannot have one 
approach that would fit all countries. Similarly, Africa has countries with civil law systems, common law 
systems and mixed law systems. Accordingly, a one size fits all approach will never work for Africa.  
Further, instability of and regular change to tax and legal regimes continue to create a prohibitive 
environment, preventing many private equity firms from investing in African jurisdictions. Finally, 
many African countries face the challenge of having relatively scarce resources of legal, financial, 
tax and accounting advisors with the proper know-how of the private equity industry and a true 
understanding of the investment cycle, including the importance of a timely exit and, accordingly, 
different exit options. 
The key challenges associated with the formation and operation of funds or fund service providers 
in Luxembourg include expensive funds costs reported in 2022 by management firms, the cost of 
managing AIFMs, local supervisors getting tougher judging for instance by the series of fines issued 
to firms that had failed to respect reporting deadlines for anti-money laundering, the multidimension 
and complexity of ESG legislation to implement.
4) Where can we expect the Luxembourg for Finance to focus its efforts for 2023?
Luxembourg For Finance efforts will focus on bringing new firms and activities to Luxembourg, 
building networks both in Luxembourg and overseas, providing market intelligence on competitive 
developments in other financial centers, identifying barriers to the development of the financial 
center within Luxembourg and providing depth to the wider activities of LFF.
9
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaCharacteristics shared by all the surveyed financial 
centres include:
• A single regulatory body for investment 
funds, companies, investment advisors, fund 
administrators and investors, enabling procedural as 
well as management efficiency for closely aligned or 
interrelated entities within the financial ecosystem. 
• A license requirement for all financial market operators 
to facilitate the supervision of their activities. 
• Access to the host country’s network of double 
taxation agreement with multiple territories. The 
UAE and South Africa appear to be important financial 
centres in terms of benefits from a large range of 
ratified treaties at 139 and 79 respectively. 
Characteristics shared by multiple financial centres 
include:
• Tax Incentives. While all financial centres offer a 
variety of tax incentives and benefits, they differ 
in nature (financial or fiscal). They may consist of 
exemptions and reduction of tax rates, deduction from 
taxable income, tax credit, deferral in time of payment 
of taxes. The UAE offers the best combination of tax 
incentives amongst the financial centres surveyed, 
offering exemptions on corporate tax rate (40 years) 
and investment income tax, a relatively low VAT (5%) 
and a large network of double taxation treaties with 139 
territories. While, Mauritius, Rwanda, Jersey also offer 
exemptions on investment income tax, Rwanda and 
Jersey offer preferential and competitive corporate 
income taxes, at respectively (3-15%) and 10%.
• Time bracketed tax-related incentives. Six of the eight 
financial centres surveyed that offer tax exemptions or 
reductions to licenced entities enforce a temporal limit 
to these privileges. Ranging from 5 years (Casablanca, 
Kigali) to 50 years (Riyadh), standard tax rates apply 
upon the conclusion of these time horizons. 
• No currency exchange controls, facilitating the 
smooth repatriation of profits or dividends and the 
management of assets and liabilities. The Moroccan 
financial centre goes further to enable the creation 
of single foreign currency accounts for registered 
entities, thereby bypassing the need for currency 
exchange in the first place.
• Non-discrimination between foreign and domestic 
investors, as in Johannesburg, Kigali, Nairobi, Jersey, 
and Riyadh. While not all these financial centres 
allow for full foreign ownership, the protection of 
foreign investments is guaranteed through the right 
to equal treatment for resident and non-resident 
investors. Some domiciles (Dubai, Nairobi, Kigali) go 
further than this principle of national treatment by 
removing statutory limits to full foreign ownership so 
to incentivise more foreign direct investment.
• No restriction on foreign employment with the 
exemption of Rwanda which requires that at least one 
third of the professional hired to be Rwandans. 
• Data protection for stakeholders, intellectual 
property, right to compensation and access to courts.Unique features by individual financial centres include:
• Multi-lingual repository of relevant investment laws 
and regulations. For countries or territories where 
English is not an official language, having multiple 
translations of seminal legislation eliminates language 
barriers that can prohibit foreign engagement with 
the country’s financial centre. For instance, Morocco’s 
Casablanca finance city has its legislation translated 
into four languages (French, English, Arabic and 
Chinese).
• Independent and dedicated courts for dispute 
resolution, as with Casablanca and Dubai. Having 
an independent body for mediation and arbitration 
ensures quick and efficient access to remediate action; 
boosts investor confidence in the right of complaint 
and administration of justice; and in the case of Dubai 
and Mauritius (which both employ a common law 
framework) also provides a familiar legal environment 
that is compliant with international standards.
• Additional capital raising opportunities and access 
to regional and international financial programs, 
as in Saudi Arabia. Foreign investors have access to 
government-sponsored financial programs such as 
the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development, 
the Arab Trade Financing Program, and the Islamic 
Development Bank, adding another layer of financial 
advantage to investment funds looking to invest in the 
Kingdom.
• Guarantees or legal safeguards against 
expropriation, as in Mauritius, Nairobi, Riyadh and 
Kigali. Arguably one of the most important substantive 
protections for private investors, the assurance that 
investments or property cannot be nationalised or 
expropriated (without compensation) adds to investor 
confidence and improves the non-commercial risk 
profile of host countries, particularly within onshore 
jurisdictions with a history of relatively unstable 
political or economic regimes.
• Incentives for carbon market investors. Bespoke 
incentives or tax deductions for companies 
operating in a carbon market exchange or emission 
trading system, as practiced in Nairobi, encourages 
market-led approaches for sustainable, low-carbon 
development3. Given the recent launch of the Africa 
Carbon Markets Initiative at COP 27 in Egypt, which is 
poised to accelerate Africa’s participation in voluntary 
carbon markets, corporate incentives such as this that 
are geared towards climate consciousness and ESG 
compliance are the subject of increasing interest from 
investors.
• Stability in law and regulation, as in Mauritius and 
Jersey which have consistently maintained laws and 
regulations aligned with international standards. While 
a strong regulatory and legal framework is important, 
it is fundamental for a financial centre to operate under 
legal and regulatory frameworks that have long-term 
consistency, with relevant changes when needed. Law 
and regulation should not be influenced by politics but 
rather based on solid international practices. Regulatory, Legal and Tax Environment: Summary
10
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaEach country represents its Financial CentreActor Key
Fund Managers FM   Fund Administrators FA    Fund Vehicles FV   Foreign Investors  FI   Investors I 
Regulatory, Legal and Tax Environment
Regulatory Framework
Regulatory Framework 1
Country Activities Regulator Law Licencing (Yes / No)
UAE Investment Funds Dubai Financial Services Authority 
(DFSA)Collective Investment Law (2010) Yes
Investment Advisors
Investment Companies Companies Law (2018)
Islamic Finance Law Regulating Islamic Financial Business (2004)
Financial Intermediaries The Central Bank of the UAE Federal Law No. 14 (2018)
Morocco Investment Funds The Moroccan Capital Market Authority 
(AMMC)Law No. 43-12 Yes
Investment Companies Law No. 5-96
Investment Advisors Law No. 43-12
Financial Intermediaries Bank Al-Maghrib (BAM) / Ministry of 
Economy and Finance (MEF)Law 103-12 and Law 40-17
Saudi Arabia Investment Funds Capital Market Authority (CMA) Investment Funds Regulations (2006) Yes
Investment Companies New Companies Law (2022)
Investment Advisors The Capital Market Law (2003)
Financial Intermediaries Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency 
(SAMA)Banking Control Law (1966) and Finance Company Control 
Law (2012)
11
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaRegulatory Framework 1
Mauritius Investment Funds Financial Services Commission The Securities (Collective Investment Schemes and 
Closed-end Funds) Regulations 2008Yes
Securities Exchanges
Investment Advisors
South Africa Investment Funds Financial Sector Conduct Authority Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services Act Yes
Investment Advisors
Rwanda Investment Funds Capital Market Authority CIS Law N° 062/2021 (2021) Yes or Exempt
Funds Managers and Operators CMA Law N°01/2011 (2011) Yes
Jersey Banks Jersey Financial Services Commission 
(JFSC)Financial Services Commission (Jersey) Law 1998 Yes
Investment Funds
General Insurance & Mediation
Funds, Trusts & Company 
Service Providers
Investment & Money Service 
Businesses
Kenya Securities Exchanges Capital Markets Authority (CMA) The Capital Markets Act Yes
Investment Banks
Credit Rating Agencies
Investment Advisors
Funds Managers and Operators
12
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaRegulatory Framework 2
UAE Morocco Saudi Arabia South Africa
• Must be licenced by the DFSA (FM, FA )4.
• Must have a full-time registered office in 
the DIFC (FM, I).
• Required to have a written Constitution or 
Partnership Deed (FM).
• Must appoint an auditor recognised by the 
DFSA (FM).
• External fund managers must appoint 
a Fund Administrator or an Appointed 
Trustee (FM).
• Companies can be structured as follows: 
Company Limited by Shares, Special 
Purpose Company, Limited Liability 
Companies, Protected Cell Companies, 
Incorporated Cell Companies (FV).
• Trusts can be structured as follows: 
Charitable Trust; Non-charitable or Purpose 
Trust, Express Trust and Protective Trusts 
(FV).
• Partnerships can be structured as follows: 
General Partnership, Limited Partnership, 
Limited Liability Partnership (FV).• Must be licenced by the AMMA or have 
specific prior authorisation issued by the 
Minister of Finance (FM, FA , I).
• Main business structures are: Companies 
(Limited Liability Company, Private 
Limited Company); Partnerships (General 
Partnership, Limited Partnership, Limited 
Partnership with Shares); Joint Ventures; 
Foreign branches; and Sole Proprietorships 
(FV).• Must be licensed by the CMA as an 
“Authorised Person” to engage in 
management or custodial activities (FM, 
FA). 
• Must appoint at least one custodian 
authorised by the CMA for funds 
established or operating in the Kingdom 
(FM).
• Must be licensed by the Ministry of 
Investment (FI).
• Private equity and venture capital funds 
are typically structured as investment 
companies (either a limited liability or joint 
stock company) or as a Capital Market 
Authority approved investment fund (FV).• Category I licence or Category II licence 
required, depending on whether the entity 
is an either an adviser or is responsible for 
the investments on behalf of the fund (FM).
• Business visa required to establish a 
business or invest in an existing South 
African business (FI).
• Private equity funds usually structured in 
the form of En commndite partnerships, 
Limited Liability Company and Bewind 
Trust (FV).
• FSCA Authorisation (Category I licence) 
required to provide non-discretionary 
intermediary services (FA ).
• FSCA Authorisation (Category III licence) 
required to use aggregated investment 
and disinvestment orders (FA ).
13
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaRegulatory Framework 2
Mauritius Rwanda Jersey Kenya
• Must have a relevant licence from the 
Financial Services Commission (FM, FA ).
• Global Business Licence should be 
channelled through a Management 
Company (FM, FA ).
• Resident corporations conducting business 
outside Mauritius require both a Category 
1 and Category 2 Global Business Licence 
from the Financial Services Commission (I).
• Investment funds are usually structured as 
either retail or non-retail funds (FV).
• Retail funds may be structured as open-end 
or close-end funds, Collective Investment 
Schemes or as Alternative Investment 
Funds (professional only) (FV).
• Investment funds can be established as: 
Companies, Limited Partnership, Limited 
Liability Partnership, Protected Cell 
Company, Trusts, Global Funds (FV).• Must be licenced by the Capital Market 
Authority of Rwanda (FM).
• Must be licenced by the Central Bank (FA ).
• Must possess an investment certificate 
from the Rwanda Development Board to 
be recognized as a registered investor (I).
• Companies can be structured as follows: 
Protected Cells, Limited Life (FV).
• Trust & Trustees can be structured as 
follows: Unit Trust, Private Trust, Public 
Trust, Private-Public Trust (FV).
• Partnerships can be structured as follows: 
General Partnership, Limited Partnership, 
Limited Liability Partnership (FV).
• Collective Investment Schemes can be 
structured as follows: Company Fund, 
Unit Trust Fund, Limited Partnership Fund, 
Contractual Fund (FV).• Must appoint an appropriately skilled and 
experienced Compliance Officer, Money 
Laundering Reporting Officer and Money 
Laundering Compliance Officer (FM).
• Required to arrange for appropriate “run 
off” Professional Indemnity Insurance 
cover when ceasing to conduct investment 
business, with consent from the JFSC on 
the level of coverage obtained (FM).
• May be established as a limited partnership, 
a unit trust; or a company, Including as 
a protected cell or incorporated cell 
company (FV).
• Can be open or closed-ended (FV).
• Must be registered under the Jersey 
Financial Services Commission (FA ). 
• Must comply with the AML/CFT legislation 
(I)
• Must comply with data protection policies 
defined by the Jersey Financial Services 
Commission (I).• Must be licenced by the Capital Market 
Authority (FM, FA ).
• Every collective investment scheme 
must appoint in writing a fund manager 
approved by the Authority (FM).
• May take the legal form of a mutual fund, 
unit trust or investment company (FV).
• Companies must maintain a register of 
shareholders of ordinary shares always 
showing the holding of foreign investors, 
Individual local investors and institutional 
local investors (I).
14
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaRegulatory Framework - Incentives
Mauritius Rwanda Jersey Kenya
• Full or Partial Exemption Regime 
applicable to domestic and global 
business (FM, FA, FV, I). 
• No capital gains tax (FM, I). 
• No withholding tax on dividends and 
interest (FM, I).
• Tax holidays for 10 years for holders of 
Collective Investment Schemes (I).
• No exchange controls (I).
• Free repatriation of profits, dividends 
and capital (FM, I).
• Offshore Asset Protection ( FM, FA, FV, 
I).• Withholding Taxation exemption for on dividend, 
Interest, and royalty payments and services 
rendered to funds licensed and domiciled in 
Rwanda (FM, FA , FV).
• VAT exemption (FM, FA , FV).
• 3% preferential corporate income tax rate (FM, 
FA, FV).
• No taxation on capital gain (FM, FV, I)
• Incentivized passive income (FM, FV)
• Personal income tax exemption for foreign 
professionals working for fund management 
entities whose remuneration is paid in a local 
bank (FM, FA ).
• Corporate income tax exemption for partners in a 
limited partnership fund approved and regulated 
by the Capital Market Authority (FV).
• Collective Investment Scheme with AIF as 
underlying investments are exempt from 
licensing (FV).
• Licencing exemption for fund managers licenced 
under financial regulators in other jurisdictions, 
recognised by the CMA (FM)
• No forex exchange controls (I).
• No restrictions on foreign ownership or assets (I). 
• 100% repatriation of profits (I).
• Immigration and Recruitment incentives (I).
• Compliance with international standards 
including OECD and FATF (I). 
• 0% preferential withholding tax on dividends, 
Interests, and royalty payments (I).
• 3-15% preferential corporate rate (I).
• 3% of corporate tax for non-deposit taking 
lending financial services licensed by BNR (I).
• 5-year tax holiday and then a 15% CIT for FAmily 
office, bank, mortgage finance institution, and 
captive insurance scheme (I).• Zero capital gains tax (FM, I).
• Zero restriction on foreign ownership (FM, I).
• No limitations on foreign exchange 
transactions (FM, I).
• Zero capital gains tax for limited partnership, 
separate limited partnerships (SLPs) and unit 
trust companies (FV).• No limitations on foreign exchange 
transactions (FM).
• Capital gains tax exemptions for 
financial derivatives traded at the 
Nairobi Securities Exchange. This is 
applicable for mutual funds, unit trusts 
and investment companies (FV).
• Capital expenditure deduction for 
investors with investment certificate in 
certain sectors (I).
• 10-year lower corporate income tax 
rate (15%) for companies operating in 
a carbon market exchange or emission 
trading system approved by the Nairobi 
International Financial Centre Authority 
(I).
15
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaLegal Framework
Legal Framework 1 – Guarantees
UAE Morocco Saudi Arabia Mauritius
FM, I
• Protection of intellectual property.
• Access to courts in an international 
legal system adopting a Common Law 
framework.
• Oversight by an independent, 
Internationally compliant risk-based 
regulator (the DFSA).
• Sharia Governance structure only 
applicable to Islamic fundsFM, FA , I:
• Right to remuneration (dividends in the 
event of an investment in shares and interest 
in the case of an investment in bonds).
• Right to net assets (reimbursement of capital 
in the event of liquidation of the issuer).
• Right to vote
• Right to compensation
• Access to courts via the Casablanca 
International Mediation & Arbitration Centre 
(for African companies in the region) and 
the dedicated chambers at Casablanca’s 
Tribunal of Commerce de Casablanca (for 
CFC headquartered companies).• Protection of intellectual property (FM, I).
• Protection of confidential commercial 
information and personal data (FM, I).
• Right to compensation (FM, I).
• Access to courts or arbitration centres  
(FM, I).
• Right to acquire real estate property necessary 
for practicing the licensed activity (I).
• Non-intervention by state. Investments shall 
not be confiscated nor expropriated (I ).
• Right to re-patriate or dispose of proceeds 
from equity sales, liquidation surplus, or profits 
generated by the project (I).
• Right to sponsorship for the foreign investor 
and any non-Saudi staff by the licensed entity 
(I).FM, I
• Investor protection provided to 
Companies, Investment Funds and 
Trusts through 29 Investment Promotion 
and Protection Agreements (15 are 
awaiting ratification).
• Right to transfer investments and returns 
held in the other contracting party.
• Guarantee against expropriation.
• Most favoured nation rule.
• Right of access to the court.
• Constitutional safeguards against 
expropriation.
• Protection of Intellectual property.
• Right to submit disputes for resolution by 
international arbitration 5.
South Africa Rwanda Jersey Kenya
FM, I
• Fair administrative treatment to investors.
• Foreign investors and their investments 
must not be treated less favourably 
than South African investors in like 
circumstances.
• Physical security of property. 
• Legal protection of investment.
• Right to re-patriate funds for foreign 
investors, subject to taxation and other 
applicable legislation.
• Processes for dispute resolution following 
the exhaustion of domestic remedies.FM, I
• Right to engage in economic activities of the 
investor’s choice
• Right to recruit or dismiss employees.
• Right to market goods and services.
• Right to freely establish business 
management; freely choose sources of 
supplies; and freely use property.
• Equal treatment for foreign investors.
• Protection of the investor’s capital and assets.
• Protection of intellectual property.
• Right to re-patriate capital and assets after 
fulfilling all tax obligations in Rwanda.FM, FA , I
• Guarantees no discrimination between 
resident and non-resident owned companies.
• Guarantees data protection for all stakeholders
• Guarantees protection from expropriation.
• Guarantees protection for foreign investment.FM, I
• Protection and non-discrimination of 
foreign investments.
• Protection from expropriation.
• Guarantees data protection and privacy 
help to protect stakeholders’ information.
16
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaLegal Framework 2 – Economic Substance
UAE Morocco Saudi Arabia Mauritius
• Base capital requirement of US$ 70,000 
for fund managers managing an Exempt 
Fund, excluding venture capital funds (FM).
• Minimum investment requirement of AED 
72,000 (value of shares owned in an 
existing company or capital investment in 
a newly established company) to secure a 
Dubai Investor Visa (FM, I).
• Investment funds and their underlying 
special purpose vehicles (SPVs) / 
investment holding entities are exempted 
from demonstrating economic substance 
(FV).
• Must have a Service Level Agreement 
and maintain records of transactions and 
services rendered to / for each operator 
of the Funds for which it is providing 
administrative services (FA ).• Société Anonyme (SA): joint stock 
companies must comprise at least five 
shareholders, with a share capital of at 
least MAD300,000 (FV).
• Société à Responsabilité Limitée (SARL): 
limited liability companies can be 
incorporated with a sole shareholder, with 
a maximum of 50 shareholders (FV).
• Foreign investments must be financed 
in foreign currency and declared to the 
Foreign Exchange Office to ensure access 
to convertibility regime benefits (I).• Minimum capital requirement of SAR5 
million for fund managers conducting 
management activities (FM).
• Foreign fund managers investing or 
operational in Saudi Arabia must be 
authorised in a jurisdiction that employs 
equivalent regulatory standards to those 
of the CMA (FM).
• Legal form of foreign investments confined 
to a limited liability company, joint stock 
company, or foreign company branch (I).• Minimum Capital Requirement of MUR1mn 
which is approx. US$22,000 (FM).
• Registration Fee of MUR25,000 which is 
approx. US$1,000 (FM).
• Fixed Annual Fee of MUR75,000 which is 
approx. (US$2,500) (FM).
• Open-end and Close-end funds as well 
as Collective Investment Schemes must 
be authorised, pay registration fees and a 
fixed annual fee (FV).
• A licenced custodian must be appointed 
for open-ended funds (FV).
• Open-end funds and Collective Investment 
Schemes are obligated to redeem a 
participant’s shares at their request, at a 
price corresponding to the net asset value 
of those investments (FV).
• Domestic retail funds must appoint a 
Mauritius-resident manager licensed as a 
CIS Manager or may also be self-managed 
by its board of directors with FSC approval 
(FV).
• Global retail funds may be managed by 
foreign managers, subject to FSC approval 
(FV).
• Registration Fee of MUR 15,000 which is 
approx. US$500 (FA ).
• Fixed Annual Fee of MUR 36,000 which is 
approx. US$1,200 (FA ).
17
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaLegal Framework 2 – Economic Substance
South Africa Rwanda Jersey Kenya
FM6 :
• Only companies registered under the 
South African Companies Act as ring-
fenced companies qualify for authorisation.
• The manager’s board must consist of at 
least four directors approved by the FSCA 
(of whom all executive directors must be 
resident in South Africa) and must include 
independent directors.
• Must maintain prescribed minimum capital 
(seed investments in portfolios while they 
have low value and the maintenance of 
capital equal to at least 13 weeks of fixed 
costs of the manager).
• Must satisfy the FSCA of the adequacy 
of its operational capacity, management 
systems, risk management and complaint 
resolution system.
• Secure regulatory approval for delegation 
of managerial duties.• No Economic Substance requirements 
(FM, FA).
• Collective Investment Scheme and 
Investment Company Scheme (FV):
 ✓Minimum fund size not less than 
US$1mn within the first 3 years. 
 ✓Minimum expenditure in Rwanda of 
US$50k per year.
 ✓CIS manager, custodian and operator 
established in Rwanda. 
 ✓At least 30% of the professional staff  
are Rwandan participants.
• Special Purpose Vehicle (FV):
 ✓Registered for investment purposes 
in projects which are meant to last for 
more than 2 years. 
 ✓Asset consolidated in Rwanda not less 
than US$1mn.
 ✓Annual expenditure in Rwanda not less 
than US$15k.
 ✓A physical office of the company in 
Rwanda.
 ✓At least 30% of the professional staff  
are Rwandan.
• Pure Holding Company (FV):
 ✓Total net assets consolidated in 
Rwanda not less than US$1mn.
 ✓Annual expenditure in Rwanda of at 
least US$15k.
 ✓Physical office of the company in 
Rwanda.
 ✓At least 30% local professional staff.• Investors in private funds must qualify as 
‘professional’ investors and/or subscribe 
for interests with a value of at least 
£250,000 (FV, I).
• Maximum of 50 investors at any time and a 
maximum of 50 initial offers and must not 
be listed on a stock exchange (FV).• Private capital deals with a combined 
annual turnover or total assets worth 
between USD 5 million and USD 10 
million must file their notification with the 
Competition Authority of Kenya (CAK); 
but they are exempted from a full merger 
review. 
• Under the information communications 
and technology sector, each prospective 
licensee must have a minimum 
shareholding by Kenyan citizens of 30%.
18
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaLegal Framework 3 – General Restrictions7
UAE Morocco Saudi Arabia Mauritius
• Full foreign ownership is prohibited in the 
14 economic sectors on the Negative List 
(2018).
• Minimum investment requirement of at 
least AED 72,000 (value of shares owned in 
an existing company or capital investment 
in a newly established company) to secure 
a Dubai Investor Visa.• Restrictions on foreign ownership and 
investment in specific business sectors 
including fishery, media, military armament, 
banking and insurance.
• Restrictions on foreign ownership of 
agricultural land (which can only be leased 
for up to 99 years).
• State or public sector monopoly on some 
sectors.• Foreign investment is prohibited in the 
10 economic sectors on the Negative List 
(2020), with some exceptions for foreign 
minority ownership in joint ventures with 
Saudi partners.
• Investors seeking state contracts must have 
their regional (Middle East) headquarters in 
the Kingdom by 2024.
• Drag-along and tag-along rights for 
minority shareholders (upon investment or 
in relation to an exit by way of trade sale) 
are not enforceable under Sharia Law.• Restrictions on foreign ownership exist 
within some sectors.
• Investments made by foreign investors 
in immovable property, or in a company 
holding freehold or leasehold immovable 
property in Mauritius, require approval 
from the Prime Minister’s Office.
South Africa Rwanda Kenya Jersey
• Restrictions on foreign ownership exist 
within some sectors.
• The ownership requirements of the Broad-
Based Black Economic Empowerment Act 
(2003) should be taken into consideration 
when doing business with the public sector.
• Exchange controls (of which only South 
African residents are subject to) exist with 
the South African Reserve Bank being the 
responsible the administrative body.• General limit on land ownership: local 
investors can acquire land through 
leasehold agreements up to a maximum 
of 99 years while foreign investors are 
restricted to leases up to a maximum of 49 
years (with the possibility of renewal).
• 1/3 of professionals hired by fund 
management entities to be Rwanda• Restrictions on foreign ownership exist 
within some sectors.
• Further, foreigners can own land in Kenya 
although this is limited to 99-year leases 
and they cannot hold agricultural land.• The number of investors in Jersey private 
fund is set at a maximum of 50 at any time 
and a maximum of 50 initial offers and 
must not be listed on a stock exchange. 
19
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaTax Framework 
Tax Framework8
Centre CIT IIT VAT DTAA
UAE Exempt Exempt 5% 139 
Morocco Exempt910-31% 20% 42
Saudi Arabia 2.5%10 (Local) 5-15% 15% 55
20%11 (Intl.)
Mauritius 15% Exempt 15% 45
South Africa 28%1221.6% (Companies) 15% 79
18% (Special Trusts)
Exempt (CIS in Securities)
Rwanda 3-15% (preferential corporate rate) Exempt 18% 13
Jersey 10% Exempt 5% 27
Kenya 30% 15% 16% 15
20
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaQ&A
with Allan Wood | Global Head of Business Development
Jersey Financial Centre
1. What has your role been in facilitating international investment and cross-border transactions 
for the private capital fund managers making use of your jurisdiction?
As an international finance centre (IFC), we have been around for more than 60 years. Jersey 
Finance has existed for more than 20 years. Today, we have offices in London, New York, Dubai, 
Johannesburg and Asia, including Shanghai, India, Hong Kong and Singapore. Our ecosystem is 
quite unique compared to other IFCs. From Jersey’s perspective, having the expertise/skill sets and 
the business environment to facilitate cross border transactions are equally important. Our financial 
services ecosystem consists of almost 200 trust and corporate services providers who are global. 
We also have a deep pool of professional talent, including lawyers; Jersey’s IFC has six international 
law firms. Also, 20 international banks - which help to facilitate transactions within the ecosystem are 
based here. And then finally, we have more than 13,500 financial services professionals working in 
this ecosystem.  
2. Your jurisdiction ranks 16th on the Global Financial Centres Index, which measures the 
competitiveness of financial centres globally. What do you attribute your strong performance 
and ranking to, and how have you positioned yourselves to become more significant to relevant 
stakeholders over time?
We are very proud of the legal framework we have developed over many decades, which supports 
international investment and institutional investors globally. We have our own democratically elected 
government and judiciary, which is vital to Jersey. Jersey has a unique constitutional position. Although 
its allegiance is to the British Crown, it is not a part of the UK and is not represented in the British 
Houses of Parliament. The Island’s domestic autonomy has been preserved via charter and convention 
through 800 years of English history. Jersey brought in its trust law in 1984, and we are custodians 
of about £600 billion of private wealth. Interestingly, some of this wealth is being used in emerging 
markets by investors looking for better returns from the UK and Europe. Jersey has a mature legal 
framework and environment that supports transactions, which is attractive to institutional investors. 
When looking at structures, particularly for clients in emerging markets such as Africa, compared to 
other IFCs, Jersey provides a cheaper route to raise capital from one or two jurisdictions. Over the 
next decade, Jersey will play a significant role in facilitating capital into emerging markets because of 
that ecosystem I mentioned earlier. From a fund administration perspective, we manage £487 billion 
of assets, and 83% of that is in the alternative space. We have 586 Jersey Private Funds (JPFs) since 
they launched in 2017 – the JPF is an extremely popular product for investment purposes. Also, in 
terms of people, we have more than 13,500 financial services professionals on-Island and the world’s 
largest STEP chapter. From an African perspective, our promotional work covers South Africa, Kenya 
and Nigeria, primarily given that they are the key economies. We can play a much more significant 
role in economic growth and job creation across the African continent and our global connectivity 
will support this aspiration. 
21
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaAnother aspect contributing to our strong performance as an IFC is our Island’s infrastructure. One 
of the forward-thinking initiatives that Jersey’s government implemented a couple of years ago has 
led to Jersey having one of the fastest broadband speeds in the world. This is further proof of our 
Island’s growing digital reputation. Islanders felt the benefit of this foresight during the pandemic 
as this supported connectivity for businesses and individuals. Construction of the third building of 
six standalone Grade 4 office space in our new International Finance Centre district is due to be 
completed in November 2023. This new district will accommodate the growing number of finance-
related businesses on-Island such as hedge funds managers, private equity funds and others. 
3. From your experience and engagement with industry stakeholders, what are the key challenges 
associated with the formation and operation of funds and fund services providers both in your 
jurisdiction and in Africa?
If we go back 20 years, Jersey was seen as over-regulated, inflexible and expensive as an alternative 
investment funds jurisdiction. The reason for this is that our government and regulator strove to 
adopt the highest standards to embrace and be early adopters of new regulation and legislation. 
Fast forward to today, Jersey is seen as proportionately regulated, innovative and competitive. Other 
global IFCs are trying to catch up with Jersey so they are becoming more expensive. Alternative fund 
managers are looking for stable jurisdictions with a no-change outlook. Jersey can play an important 
role in Africa’s development when it comes to fund domiciliation and FDI. The challenge for Jersey 
is dispelling the myth that a tax neutral environment means supporting tax evasion; this is not the 
case. We must dispel these myths and continue demonstrating our IFC’s adherence to international 
standards. The concept of tax neutrality is simple: it is a tool that avoids imposing additional layers 
of tax on top of what investors and companies owe in their own jurisdiction, in compliance with their 
domestic tax rules. Being tax neutral is not the same as being a “tax haven”.
22
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaProfessional Landscape and Talent Competitiveness
* Source: Preqin, Fund Managers and PSF based in the country.
** Source: Casablanca Finance City 2020 Annual Report.South Africa 339
289
277
129Jersey
UAE (Dubai)
Saudi Arabia
75
33Mauritius
Kenya
20
<10Morocco
Rwanda
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350Fund Managers*Professional Landscape
South Africa 93
90**
87
47Morocco
UAE (Dubai)
Mauritius
32
24Jersey
Saudi Arabia
10
<10Kenya
Rwanda
0 20 40 60 80 100PSF*The level of development in a financial centre can 
be measured through the availability and access to 
multiple financial services firms. Globally, financial 
centres aim to build a business hub that will consist 
of core financial services firms and other professional 
service providers. Specifically, most financial centres 
put in place infrastructures and framework that will attract commercial banks, investment banks, investment 
consultants and advisors, accounting firms, law firms, 
fund administrators, and other financial services firms. 
For our analysis, we focus on core financial services 
such as fund managers, professional service firms, 
banks, and insurance companies.
23
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaWhile UAE, Kenya and Saudi Arabia give access to large 
range of banks, South Africa, Jersey, and UAE appear 
to be top financial centres in terms of number insurance 
companies available in their markets. Across all the professional landscape, South Africa, 
UAE, and Jersey offer a large range of financial services 
firms and other professional service providers.UAE (Dubai)
60+Kenya
44Saudi Arabia
35+South Africa
31Morocco
20+Jersey
20Mauritius
19Rwanda
16
South Africa
170Jersey
164UAE (Dubai)
62Kenya
46Saudi Arabia
27Morocco
22Mauritius
9Rwanda
17Banks
InsuranceFor fund managers, South Africa give investors access 
to the largest number of fund managers (339) which is 
not far-fetched given the role South Africa played in 
the emergence and development of private capital in 
Africa. Jersey (289) and UAE (277) complete the top 
3 in terms of number of fund managers. Jersey has 
remained a top destination for investment funds while Dubai International Financial Centre has provided 
attractive incentives since its establishment in 2004 to 
attract financial services firms. South Africa is the only 
onshore financial centre rivalling the offshores in terms 
of high availability of fund managers. South Africa also 
leads the number of professional service firms, followed 
by Morocco and UAE.
24
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaTalent Competitiveness
GTCI Rank
UAE
250 110
Saudi Arabia
43Mauritius
51Kenya
97Rwanda
106
Morocco
96South Africa
77
Source: Global Talent Competitiveness 2022 (INSEAD, Human Capital Leadership Institute and Portulans Institute)UAE Morocco Kenya Jersey - N/A Saudi Arabia South Africa Rwanda Mauritius Enable
Attract
Grow
Retain
0 12022
113 105 97 8481 38 5196 118
9781 33 90 19101 8279 55 44 39
104 86 115 56 37
384
Talent is important to the development of a financial 
centre as it plays a key role in the quality of financial 
services provided to investors and corporates. 
Availability and access to top quality talents also make 
it easy for global firms to expand to a financial centre. 
The most successful financial centres have in place 
policies that will not only attract but also retain top 
talents at the centre. Given the importance of talents, we 
analyse these financial centres using the Global Talent 
Competitiveness index, 2021 which covers enabling, 
attracting, growing and retaining talent. 
Dubai, Riyadh and Mauritius are the top ranked countries 
according to the Global Talent Competitiveness Index 
2021. Dubai stands out and is part of the top 5 performers globally in its ability to attract talent, echoing its internal 
and external openness, conducive work environment 
and zero personal income tax. Dubai also performs well 
in enabling talent as it offers a strong regulatory, market, 
business and labour landscapes. While Riyadh is also 
strong in growing talent, it is noted that both Dubai and 
Riyadh are relatively low ranked in retaining talent. On the 
other hand, Mauritius’ strength in attracting and retaining 
talent can be attributed to a robust sustainability and 
lifestyle, including social protection, pension coverage 
and environment performance. It is worth noting that all 
onshore financial centres are relatively underperforming, 
except for South Africa which is particularly strong in 
enabling and attracting talent.
25
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaQ&A
with Vincent Rague | Chairperson, Board of Directors
Nairobi Financial Centre
1) In terms of competitiveness, there are about four competitiveness area for financial centres: 
the business environment, the market access, the people, and the infrastructure. So, among all of 
them, which one will you say that your competitive advantage lies and your top priority?
In the context of Africa, I think all of the above are important. A conducive business environment 
is key component for us. We are setting out to become competitive, and as you know, Nairobi is 
already a hub in Eastern Africa in the sense that you have several corporations that use Nairobi as 
their regional or African headquarters.
In terms of the quality of life, Kenya is an attractive place to live. We have a few infrastructure 
challenges, but the Government is investing heavily to improve the infrastructure. Nairobi already 
has the cluster effect. Kenya also has the largest number of English medium schools outside of 
England. Plus, there are schools that provide education to many nationalities: the French school, 
the German school, International School (US-based curriculum) and Japanese institutions. China has 
also recently set up the Confucius Institute in Nairobi. We have modern medical facilities. There is 
very good in connectivity with Kenya Airways, Ethiopian Airways and most of the major international 
airlines flying in and out of Nairobi. The reliability of the internet in Nairobi is one of the best around. 
And there’s no malaria. All in all, I think Nairobi provides the lifestyle that is attractive to expats. 
Secondly, we have perhaps one of the most educated workforces in Africa. Kenya produces a large 
number of university graduates each year. Outside Kenya, you have a lot of Kenyans in the diaspora 
who mostly work as professionals, which is a big plus and diaspora remittance has become the largest 
source of foreign currency earnings. Furthermore, Kenya is one of the leaders, alongside Nigeria, 
South Africa and Egypt, in technological innovation in Africa which receive the most investments. 
So, I think that these attributes give Kenya a competitive advantage. Overall, we have a fairly stable 
legislative framework that is that is backed by a well-functioning judicial system based on English 
common law and is in line with international standards. People generally adhere to the rule of law. 
For instance, we had a very closely contested election last year that was challenged in court by the 
losers. The verdict was in favour of the victors and was accepted by the population.  There were no 
street protests or riots. That’s credit to a strong regulatory and institutional environment. 
Lastly, Kenya has the strongest and most diversified economy in Eastern Africa and provides 
investment in some of the neighbouring countries. 
2) From your experience and engagement with industry stakeholders, what are the key challenges 
associated with the formation and operation of funds and fund services providers both in your 
jurisdiction and in Africa?
I think that the first one is the unpredictability of taxes. This is however not unique to Africa. Every new 
government that comes into power often wants to make changes to the tax regime or regulations, 
and that causes anxiety to investors. The second one is associated with the fact that a lot of the 
capital that is invested in Africa comes from offshore territories. But that’s, perhaps because we don’t 
26
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africayet have a lot of investable and well-structured domestic products. For example, most companies 
with foreign partners have preferential access to capital, often because the promoters understand 
how to structure the projects in a manner that is understood and accepted by investors. However, 
indigenous businesses still face the challenge of structuring businesses well enough to attract 
investment. In other words, a lot of local businesses tend to be controlled by individuals that are 
reluctant to open up to third party investment. The instinct for local sponsors is to want to continue 
to control the business as it grows, which is a key governance concern for institutional investors. 
Furthermore, there is a challenge for cross border activities, primarily because of lack of double 
taxation treaties across Africa. Even with Kenya’s own members of the East African Community, we 
do not have double taxation with some of them. So, these are some of the challenges that we hope 
we can start to address as we go forward. 
3) What are some of the challenges the Nairobi International Financial Centre has encountered 
when rolling out its key products, services and activities since inception, both on the country level 
and internationally?
My take is that we cannot have a short-term view. When you look at successful international financial 
centres, they have taken a long time to achieve their position of success, whether it be London, New 
York, Singapore, Hong Kong, and increasingly Shanghai or Tokyo. Financial centres must be adaptive 
in responding to the changing environment, seeing where the challenges are coming from, and 
seeking to address those challenges. For example, today technology is the driver of the international 
economy. Within technology, there is a sub-sector called big data and AI. So, there are some things 
that we need to focus on in order to become attractive to the deployment of technology and big data, 
which we would like to attract to be located in Nairobi. To find Nairobi attractive, we need first class 
human capital. That’s what we are striving to do, to bring in people that understand this dynamic and 
help us respond appropriately.
27
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaUAE 2
28
55
70Saudi Arabia
Mauritius
Kenya
80
84Rwanda
South Africa
89 MoroccoRanking DSGI 
0 2 4 6 8 107.5
6.3
5.0
4.8
4.5
4.4
4.1
UAE 1
27
50
52Saudi Arabia
Morocco
Mauritius
55
74Kenya
Rwanda
94 South AfricaRanking Supply, Demand & Competitiveness Index
0 2 4 6 8 108.7
6.7
5.8
5.8
5.7
5.3
4.8Technological Environment
Innovative development and digital skills emerge 
as game-changers in current times for international 
financial centres. They are indeed important hedge 
against economic challenges on a global scale 
and give IFCs winning advantage in a world where 
technology is essential to the new normal as the 
pandemic has transformed the way organisations work. 
Staying relevant and standing apart in the competitive 
investment landscape depends on the technological 
environment.
The research agency Wiley13 conducted the Digital Skills 
Gap Index (DSGI) survey to evaluate the digital strength, 
resilience, and responsiveness of ecosystems globally. 
The 2021 DSGI ranked UAE second after Singapore 
among the 134 economies and territories included in the Index, a finding that confirms the economy’s 
reputation for heavily investing in human capital. UAE 
scored consistently well across most of the DGSI pillars, 
especially the government support in bridging the 
digital gap and the level and availability of digital skills 
where it appears leader worldwide.
Rwandan’s government digital support is among the top 
performers in the world. Third after UAE and Singapore, 
the Rwandan’s government success in ICT promotion 
(ranked 2nd) and importance of ICT in its vision (ranked 4th) 
is a key strength. It is worth noting that the government 
support is also a key strength for Kenya, but what sets the 
country apart, is the ease of finding skilled employees, 
where Kenya is ranked among the 25 top performers 
(21st) globally and the first African country.
28
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaSaudi Arabia 10
32
41
49UAE
Kenya
Rwanda
56
96South Africa
Morocco
100 MauritiusRanking Data Ethics & Integrity Index
0 2 4 6 8 108.8
8.1
7.5
7.0
6.5
4.3
4.1
1
3
10
19
32
43
111Ranking Government Support Index
0 2 4 6 8 1010.0
9.4
7.8
6.6
5.9
5.2
2.6UAE 
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Kenya
Mauritius
Morocco
South Africa
* Source: The Digital Skills Gap Index (DSGI) 2021, Global Financial Centres Index 2022UAE
290 110
Saudi Arabia
75Mauritius
100 Kenya
89Jersey
107
Rwanda
102Morocco
91South Africa
60GFCI FinTech (Rank)
29
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaGovernance
UAE 1.4
1.18
0.85
0.5Jersey
Mauritius
Saudi Arabia
0.26
-0.02Rwanda
South Africa
-0.07
-0.33Morocco
Kenya
-1.2 -0.9 -0.6 -0.3 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5
Mauritius 1.17
1.01
0.93
0.34UAE
Jersey
Saudi Arabia
0.07
-0.07Rwanda
South Africa
-0.12
-0.45Morocco
Kenya
-1.2 -0.9 -0.6 -0.3 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5Government Effectiveness
Regulatory QualityWhen it comes to data ethics and integrity, including 
issues around cybersecurity that are integral to sustained 
and sustainable digital development, Saudi Arabia 
leads financial centres in our coverage (ranked 10th 
globally), followed by UAE and Kenya. Saudi Arabia also 
performed well in government success in ICT promotion 
and is ranked 10th worldwide. While the government 
success in promoting ICT is the first key strength 
among most of the IFCs surveyed in this section, South 
Africa differentiates with the data ethics and integrity, in 
particular the cybersecurity performance.Finally, being an international FinTech centre or a 
financial hub for innovative industries is a certain 
advantage that IFCs cannot neglect. In this regard, 
Shenzhen14 produced a GFCI FinTech where it assessed 
113 centres for their Fintech offering. UAE confirms its 
leading position in the Fintech ranking (29th), followed 
by far by South Africa (60th) and Saudi Arabia (75th). It is 
worth noting that the top 3 in the GFCI FinTech ranking 
in Africa is South Africa, Nigeria and Kenya. 
30
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaUAE 0.63
0.63
0.61
0.58Rwanda
Mauritius
South Africa
0.48
0.45Morocco
Kenya
N/A
N/AJersey
Saudi Arabia
-1.2 -0.9 -0.6 -0.3 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5Rule of Law
UAE
69
Mauritius
54Kenya
30Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
53Morocco
39
South Africa
440 100
10Kenya
4.41UAE
6.79
MauritiusMorocco
5.8
Saudi Arabia
6.065.34
South Africa
5.53Rwanda
5.410Corruption Perception
Property Rights
31
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaDoing business and succeeding in emerging or 
developing markets is influenced by the quality of 
the regulatory, legal and political landscape. Opaque 
regulatory regimes, weak institutions, and invisible 
influence networks may expose companies to legal, 
reputational and economic risks.
The Worldwide Governance Indicators produced 
by the World Bank shows that while all countries are 
performing relatively well in and abide the rule of law, 
Mauritius stands out (1st) among the IFCs surveyed in 
terms of the ability of the government to formulate and implement policies and regulations that promote private 
investment. It also offers a strong political stability 
and government effectiveness, conferring a winning 
advantage when it comes to alleviating investment 
risks and facilitating the pooling of funds. In addition, 
UAE and Jersey appear to be important financial 
centres providing strong institutions and solid legal 
and regulatory systems. It is worth noting that Rwanda 
leads the onshore financial centres surveyed across all 
the governance indicators, confirming its position as a 
recognized African jurisdiction for business.Source: World Governance Indicators 2021 (World Bank), Rule of Law 2022 (World Justice Project), Corruption Perception Index 2022 (Transparency 
International), International Property Rights Index 2022 (Property Right Alliance).Jersey 1.29
0.86
0.65
0.17Mauritius
UAE
Rwanda
-0.4
-0.58Morocco
Saudi Arabia
-0.71
-1.09South Africa
Kenya
-1.2 -0.9 -0.6 -0.3 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5Political Stability
32
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaCompetitive advantages of Financial Centres 
servicing Africa
The decision to domicile fund in a particular jurisdiction is a critical aspect of 
investment decision that investors usually consider as fundamental. This section 
will provide the comparative advantages, investors should look at while choosing 
a domicile among the following jurisdictions: Rwanda, Mauritius, South Africa, UAE, 
Luxembourg, and Jersey. 
Rwanda
Kigali International Financial Centre (KIFC): An 
attractive tax regime particularly for fund management 
services, a strong support to sustainable finance and 
initiatives to enable and attract talents.
KIFC offers one of the most attractive tax regimes in 
Africa, specifically for fund management activities. 
The centre is the second onshore jurisdiction (after 
Casablanca) offering the lowest preferential corporate 
tax rate (3%) for fund managers, fund administrators and 
fund vehicles; and the third among the key international 
financial centres servicing Africa, after Dubai and 
Casablanca, which offer an exemption.  It also offers 
tax exemption on corporate tax rate for partners in a 
limited partnership (under conditions), capital gains, 
dividends and interests and VAT for fund managers, 
fund administrators and fund vehicles. Finally, the 
centre has a 5-year tax holiday for family office, captive 
insurance scheme, private banks, Mortgage institutions. 
These combination of tax incentives for firms in fund 
management activities constitute a key asset for KIFC. Moreover, KIFC positions itself as a strong enabler 
for sustainable and green investing. This has been 
backed by the Rwandan’s government through 
the establishment of a fund, under the ministry of 
environment, to give grants for green projects that 
will make them scalable. In addition, KIFC has joined 
the Financial Centres for Sustainability (FC4S) and 
the Sustainable Stock Exchange, which respectively 
aim to accelerate the shift to sustainable finance and 
encourage sustainable investment. 
Finally, KIFC’s initiatives to attract talent are particularly 
attractive and should promote access to highly qualified 
professionals. These initiatives include a 5-year work 
visa and an income tax exemption for contractual foreign 
professionals under conditions. Professionals also can 
work for an international company while simultaneously 
working for a local firm.   
Mauritius
Mauritius Financial Centre (MFC): A familiarity and 
reputation among the global investment community 
coupled with a political stability, a solid legal, 
regulatory and tax framework, and an availability and 
access to highly qualified professionals. 
Familiarity remains the core strength of Mauritius as it 
is the most popular jurisdiction for fund domiciliation 
in Africa. With its popularity, fund managers can easily 
market fund domiciled in Mauritius as it gives comfort 
to investors who prefer to invest in familiar jurisdiction 
with strong reputation.  Mauritius is also recognised as 
the most politically stable jurisdiction in Africa, giving it 
an added competitive advantage. 
Mauritius also maintains a strong and flexible legal and 
regulatory framework, allowing it to be at the forefront 
of new developments and attract investors. Mauritius 
set for instance, a Regulatory Sandbox Licence under 
the aegis of the Economic Development Board (EDB) for innovative projects including Fintech. This is part of the 
country’s efforts to regulate business activity for which 
there are no legal framework, or adequate provisions 
under existing local legislation, within an enabling 
environment in Mauritius. Furthermore, Mauritius 
offers a competitive tax regime with its tax exemption 
on capital gains, dividends and interests, inheritance, 
wealth, gift, and a 10-year tax holiday for funds. Finally, 
investors can benefit from Mauritius extensive network 
of 44 double taxation agreements.  
Compared to most jurisdictions in Africa, Mauritius 
offers investors access to qualified professionals that 
drive fund management activities. The country ranks 
first in Africa in talent competitiveness according to the 
Global Talent Competitiveness Index 2022. Mauritius 
is particularly strong in attracting and retaining talent, 
which can be attributed to a robust sustainability and 
lifestyle, including social protection, pension coverage 
and environment performance.
33
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaSouth Africa
South Africa: A highly developed financial market 
- pioneer in Africa, an availability and access to 
qualified professionals and a conducive environment 
for Fintech investments.
South Africa’s competitive strength lies in its financial 
market which has developed ahead of other African 
countries. The country is a host to many top global firms 
which are attracted to the sophisticated infrastructural 
facilities and technology South Africa offers. In addition, 
South Africa’s pioneer position in African private capital 
market has supported the development of the industry, 
and its stock market - Johannesburg Stock exchange 
- has the largest market capitalization in Africa. The 
country not only provides investors access to a large 
number of fund managers and professional services 
firms compared to other countries in Africa, but it also gives investors the opportunity to invest among a broad 
range of financial products. 
Furthermore, Johannesburg positions itself as an 
essential jurisdiction for investment in Fintech as 
confirmed by its ranking as the number 1 financial centre 
in Africa in the GFCI Fintech. South Africa’s central bank 
through the National Payment System Act 1998, has 
been playing a pivotal role in supporting innovation 
and Fintech. In addition, South African Reserve Bank 
has also been supportive for innovation through its 
Intergovernmental Fintech Working Group (IFWG) with 
the aim of understanding the growing role of Fintech 
and innovation in the South African financial sector. The 
IFWG has also launched its regulatory Sandbox in 2020 
and it is exploring how regulators can more proactively 
assess emerging risks and opportunities in the market.
Jersey Financial Centre (JFC): A strong legal and 
regulatory framework compliant with the highest 
global standards, a competitive tax regime and 
an availability and access to highly qualified 
professionals. 
One of the key strengths of Jersey Financial Centre 
is its regulatory framework which is supported by its 
compliance with global standards. Jersey is keen on 
maintaining high standard of financial transparency and 
this reflected in its achievement of one of the highest 
MONEYVAL assessments in 2016. To complement 
its regulatory framework, the centre is committed to 
fighting financial related crime as it financial rules 
comply with 48 out of 49 FATF recommendations15  
which is uncommon among other jurisdictions.In addition to its legal and regulatory framework, Jersey 
offers one of the most attractive tax regimes. The centre 
offers a tax exemption on capital gains, corporate tax 
with exceptions to financial service companies which 
are taxed at 10%, and one of the lowest Valued Added 
Tax (5%) compared to most jurisdictions.  
Finally, Jersey key strength lies in its access to qualified 
professionals.  The centre gives investors access to a 
large pool of professionals across financial services, 
banking and fintech. Specifically, the Centre has over 
13,600 financial service professionals, more than 3000 
digital and technology professionals and over 1120 
members of the Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners 
(STEP)16. Jersey
Luxemburg Financial Centre: A strong and flexible 
legal and regulatory framework, a stable political 
environment and an availability and access to highly 
qualified professionals. 
Luxembourg provides a flexible regulatory environment 
that offers an extensive range fund structures for 
a diversified investment landscape. It has notably 
developed a distinctive toolbox of investment vehicles, 
and a strong regulation and expertise in domain such as ESG-related investment, family office industry, virtual 
currency operators, and digital currency exchange.
The country’s political, economic, and regulatory stability 
provide a solid framework that protects investors’ 
interest and support financial services. Luxembourg’s 
credit rating of AAA with a stable outlook by all top rating 
firms (S&P, Fitch, and Moody)17 highlights the consensus 
from the global financial community on Luxembourg’s 
political and economic stability. Further, the country Luxembourg
34
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaUAEwas ranked in top 5% most politically stable countries 
in the world according to the World Bank Governance 
indicator survey for political stability in 202118.
Luxembourg financial centre also has peculiar advantage 
with its professionals which includes a unique pool of 
multilingual, highly skilled talent that helps to unlock Europe’s huge and diverse single market. Given its 
closeness to Germany, France and Belgium, Luxembourg 
has been able to attract more than 210,000 people 
who commute from these neighbouring countries19. 
Luxembourg has a highly skilled workforce ranked 
first in the world in knowledge-intensive employment 
according to the Global Innovation Index 202120. 
Dubai International Financial Centre (DIFC): A strong 
legal, regulatory and tax framework, an innovative 
environment and an availability and access to top 
quality talents.
Renowned for its strong connections with leading 
global financial centres and wide connections with 
other centres across the world, Dubai International 
Financial Centre’s (DIFC) first competitive advantage 
lies in its strong institutions and solid legal, regulatory 
and tax framework. According to the Global Finance 
Centre Index (GFCI, 2022), Dubai was recognized one 
of the top 15 financial centres in business environment, 
infrastructure quality, government effectiveness and 
regulatory quality. The centre also offers one of the most 
attractive tax regimes with exemptions on corporate tax 
rate guaranteed for 40 years, exemptions on investment 
income tax and income tax on individuals, a relatively 
low VAT (5%) and a large network of double taxation 
treaties with 139 territories.
Furthermore, DIFC is strategically well positioned in 
terms of technological environment and digital skills. 
The centre ranks leader worldwide in the government support in bridging the digital gap, as well as in the level 
and availability of digital skills, according to the 2021 
Digital Skills Gap Index. The introduction of the Golden 
Visa which aims to attract foreign entrepreneurs that 
want to make the UAE their long-term base to build 
and scale technologies and innovative solutions, is 
an example of initiatives that has transformed Dubai’s 
global status. The centre is also considered as a 
leading International Fintech Centre as it was ranked 
29th globally according to the GFCI in 2022. Dubai’s 
development in Fintech has been largely driven by 
its support through investment in physical and digital 
infrastructure.
Last, but not least, is Dubai’s reputation for investing 
heavily in human capital, which leads to availability and 
access to top quality talents.  It scored well across the 
key pillars of the 2022 Global Talent Competitiveness 
Index. Dubai is indeed part of the top 5 performers 
globally in its ability to not only attract talent, echoing 
its internal and external openness, conducive work 
environment and zero personal income tax, but also 
to enable talent as it offers a strong regulatory, market, 
business, and labour landscapes.
35
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaBridging Regulatory Gap Through 
Reforms
KIFC offers a legal and regulatory environment which 
complies with international standards and aims at not only 
protecting investments, but also enabling them by providing 
a wide range of investment vehicles and incentives 
available to local and foreign investors. Through several 
reforms, KIFC has been able to close regulatory gaps, 
particularly in Banking and Capital Market. The centre has 
recently passed 17 laws to foster and boost international 
financial services and activities, which have improved the 
centre’s compliance to financial and investment standards 
as recommended by the FATF and OECD. It has set up three 
key laws to improve the level of financial transparency and 
coordination as the laws focus on Anti-Money Laundering 
and Counter Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT), Mutual 
Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters, and establishment of 
the Financial Intelligence Centre. 
When it comes to unique features of its legal and regulatory 
framework, KIFC has in this case, licensing exemption for 
collective investment scheme in alternative investment. 
Specifically, there is a licensing exemption for fund 
managers licensed under financial regulators in other 
jurisdictions. In addition, the centre has some remarkable 
features which include preferential corporate tax rate, tax 
exemption for partnership funds, VAT exemption for fund 
managers, fund administrators and fund vehicles and 
personal income tax exemption for contractual foreign 
professionals under some conditions. Finally, it should 
be noted that one of KIFC priorities is to support Fintech 
through regulation. As a result, the centre has put in place a 
regulatory sandbox, through the National Bank of Rwanda, 
that promotes Fintech and innovation. This regulatory 
sandbox is expected to support unicorns that choose Kigali 
as their base to serve the African continent.Spotlight on Kigali International Financial Centre
Kigali International Financial Centre (KIFC), one of the emerging international financial 
centres, is recognized as one of the centres expected to become more significant 
over the next two to three years according to the Global Finance Index Report 202227. 
According to the report, Kigali was not only the African jurisdiction from the list of 15 
financial centres expected to become more significant over the next years, but also 
one of the financial centres with a reputational advantage given its huge popularity 
among the global investment community, stemming from its successful marketing in 
recent years. This section will highlight the key achievements and features that have 
contributed to KIFC recognition on the global stage.
The centre has put 
in place a regulatory 
sandbox that is 
expected to support 
unicorns that choose 
Kigali as their base 
to serve the African 
continent.
36
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaAn Attractive Tax Regime for Fund 
Management Services
Building a business-friendly environment through a 
competitive tax regime is another key focus for KIFC. The 
centre offers multiple tax incentives that allow companies to 
grow with little or no tax burden. Specifically, Kigali offers one 
of the most attractive corporate tax rates for fund management 
activities in Africa as it levies only 3% corporate tax on these 
activities, and even offers exemption for partners in limited 
partners funds approved and regulated by the Rwandan 
Capital Market Authority. The centre also proposes a personal 
income exemption for foreign professionals working for 
fund management entities whose remuneration is paid in a 
local bank. In addition, KIFC exempts investment funds and 
fund management from VAT on services related to financial 
intermediaries, and has zero withholding tax on dividends, 
interests, and royalty payment and exemption on capital gains. 
The centre benefits from Rwanda’s large network of double 
taxation agreements which include Jersey, Luxembourg, 
Qatar, UAE, Belgium, and China.  This gives KIFC an additional 
advantage in terms of attractiveness to investors.
A stable political and governance 
foundation 
Rwanda’s strong ranking across major political, governance 
and transparency indexes makes the country particularly 
attractive for African investors as well as their international 
counterparts. The country has a relatively high ranking in 
political stability and government effectiveness according 
to the 2021 Worldwide Governance Indicators. It is also the 
highest ranked African country in rule of law by the World 
Justice Project Index 202228, and the second highest 
ranked African country by the Transparency International. 
This highlights the efforts to fight corruption and to offer a 
stable and reassuring environment for attracting foreign 
investments. In addition, KIFC has created an Independent 
Dispute Resolution Mechanism to provide additional security 
and safety to stakeholders.
An Impetus for Capital Market 
Growth 
While KIFC is still at early stage of its development, it has 
been able to attract a number of firms including insurance 
companies, micro-finance banks, and pension fund. 
Specifically, there were about 13 pension funds, 14 insurance 
firms, and 457 MFIs, including 438 credit and savings schemes 
at the Kigali International Financial Centre as of year-end 
202129. The centre has also attracted large funds including 
the US$350Million FEDA fund, an-African trade and export 
fund established by the Afrexim Bank which is supporting 
and fostering intra-African trade,  the US$250Million Virunga 
fund between the Qatar Investment Authority and Rwanda 
Social Security Board and the US$10Million Angel Investment 
SPV, a regional special purpose vehicle registered in Kigali, by a network of African based angel and venture capital 
investors – Dakar Network of Angel Investors (DNA)30. 
Furthermore, KIFC has positioned itself to attract sustainable 
and green related fund. KIFC has developed a sustainable 
finance roadmap with the aim of ensuring that activities at 
the centre adjust to climate change. This has been backed 
by the Rwandan’s government through the establishment of 
a fund, under the ministry of environment, to give grants for 
green projects that will make them scalable.  The government 
has also started a new initiative between the green fund and 
the development bank to provide technical assistance and 
offer loan, direct equity, and insurance solution on green 
and sustainable projects. In addition, Kigali International 
Financial Centre has also joined the Financial Centres for 
Sustainability (FC4S) and the Sustainable Stock Exchange. 
These organisations aim to accelerate the shift to sustainable 
finance and encourage sustainable investment respectively.
Strong Initiatives to Attract Talent
Kigali International Financial centre has made efforts to 
attract foreign professionals as well as supporting local 
talents. It offers incentives to attract foreign talents such 
as a 5-year work visa for contractual foreign professionals 
and a personal income tax exemption for contractual foreign 
professionals whose remuneration is paid in a local bank.  
The centre is also putting in place a strategy to build the 
local talent and improve its availability. It provides a flexible 
work environment where professionals are allowed to work 
for international companies alongside their employment 
in Rwanda.  Income generated from those international 
companies will not be taxed for five years. It also requires 
that at least one third of the professionals hired by fund 
management entities to be Rwandans, in its aim to develop 
local talents. 
KIFC has developed 
a sustainable finance 
roadmap with the 
aim of ensuring that 
activities at the centre 
adjust to climate 
change. 
37
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaQ&Awith Ntoudi Mouyelo | Chief Investment Officer 
and Adelit Nsabimana | Technical Advisor
Kigali International Financial Centre
1. What were the drivers behind the formation and creation of your financial centre? And what is 
the role of the financial centre in the ecosystem?
The formation of our financial centre was driven by the initiative of government of Rwanda to position 
the country as the preferred international financial centre for international investment across Africa. 
This initiative is in line with Rwanda’s strategic vision of becoming a high-income country by 2050 
and the National Strategy for Transformation. 
One of the goals for setting up the Kigali International Financial Centre on one hand, is to address 
some macroeconomic challenges faced by our country, including scaling our foreign exchange 
reserve, given that financial centres can help attract foreign investments and secondly, to leverage 
the financial centre in  creating additional employment opportunities for Rwandans. Thanks to the 
tax incentives given to investors, we expect some economic spill over on the local economy with the 
creation of additional jobs. On the other hand,  we saw an opportunity to offer regional and African 
focused investors an alternative jurisdiction  to  facilitate funds domiciliation and asset consolidation 
on the continent. Given that currently, very few jurisdictions on the continent offer these kinds of 
specialized services.
We would like to see Kigali International Financial Centre be the best place in Sub Saharan Africa 
where investors can multiply their wealth under a transparent jurisdiction based on the rule of law. 
As such, the centre is open and attractive to private equity funds, venture capitalist funds and all 
types of alternative investment vehicles, as well as holding companies. We have noticed that many 
companies operating in Africa have a need to consolidate their accounts. As such, facilitating holding 
companies to consolidate their financial assets under a single entity is one of the key benefits the 
Centre offers.
2. Given the recognition of Kigali as one of the financial centres that is considered to become more 
significant over the next two to three years, we would like to hear from you on what sets the Kigali 
International Financial Centre apart from other FCs? What are your competitive advantages?
One of the key factors for our successful performance is the conducive legal and regulatory framework 
we have in Rwanda, which is compliant with international best standards, as well as the substantial 
efforts put in expanding Rwanda’s double tax treaty network  with many African and Western countries 
to facilitate investment flows. Secondly, there is deliberate drive to support investment in Africa 
through constructive partnerships with international jurisdictions and institutions, which includes the 
Qatar Financial Centre, Jersey Finance, the British International Investment, the Monetary Authority 
of Singapore and other key Financial Centres and governments across the globe.
38
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaThese deliberate and constructive efforts have led to a few successes, including the establishment of 
an impact fund for example dedicated to finance education of students from low-income backgrounds 
across East and Southern Africa. We have also seen the creation of an investment structure coming 
from West Africa, named “Dakar Network Angels”, for investors looking to target and invest mainly 
in West Africa. The establishment of the “Africa Pharmaceutical Technology Foundation” from the 
African Development Bank who chose to domicile in Rwanda for investments across the continent, 
was also a result of these strategic efforts. We have also seen a large inflow in fintech deals for 
private equity funds which has supported investments in Unicorns (Chipper cash) and other small 
start-ups. 
3. From your perspective, what are the challenges that you have encountered when rolling out 
your operations and activities since inception? Both at the country and international level
From our perspective, a key challenge is the lack of professional service providers. There is also the 
issue around developing appropriate pipeline for private equity or venture capital projects in Africa.  
Access to information has also proved to another challenge facing financial centres in Africa. This 
includes access to information on how services could be implemented or could be of added value 
in other countries. It is not always easy to understand the regulations and have access to simple 
data. At a continental level, there is a lack of adequate regulation to support the development of 
the private equity sector. In Rwanda, we have established a capacity building strategy and put in 
place incentives that will help to improve access to professional service providers in the country. 
In addition, in collaboration with key stakeholders from both the public and private sector, we are 
working towards bringing more visibility to existing initiatives to address the challenge of lack of 
information; as well as working on a framework to support pipeline development.
39
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaQ&A
with John Bellew | Head of Private Equity 
Bowmans
1) Which are your key considerations when determining domicile selection amongst the fund 
managers you have worked with? 
Availability of capital trumps any other factor. Often, we find that if you want to raise capital in a 
particular African jurisdiction, you may need to set up a fund vehicle in that jurisdiction, whether it’s 
a parallel vehicle or whether it’s a feeder fund. The decision as to whether you would do that would 
obviously depend on the size of the commitment, as the management fee from the commitment 
should be sufficient to pay the costs of running that fund entity. 
I think there has always been a view that international investors would prefer to invest in a fund vehicle 
domiciled in a jurisdiction that they are familiar with. Over the years, we have seen a lot of what we 
call “dual fund” structures in South Africa. A South African fund manager sets up a vehicle for South 
African investors in South Africa, and a separate offshore vehicle for offshore investors. Jurisdictions 
for the non-South African fund entity have included over the years the Cayman Islands, Delaware, 
Luxembourg, the Channel Islands and Mauritius. Mauritius is particularly attractive because of its 
wide range of double tax treaties and the cost effective but competent professional and support 
services it offers to funds. 
Finally, I think that political stability of the jurisdiction where the fund is established is a relevant 
factor. For the fund itself of course the political stability of the jurisdictions in which it intends to invest 
is probably more important. 
2) On the back of the need to raise other parallel funds or feeder funds to meet the need of 
different investors for fund managers with a broad geographical mandate, what would the 
standard practice previously have been? 
South Africa is perhaps a little bit unique because of the existence of exchange controls. For a long 
period of time, South African LPs were not permitted to invest into non-South African vehicles that 
invested back into South Africa, because this created a so-called prohibited ‘loop structure’.  It was 
therefore necessary to have a South African vehicle to accommodate South African investors. 
Most fund managers would like to keep their structures as simple as possible. However, in the 
difficult African fundraising environment, many end up with extremely complex structures in a bid to 
accommodate LPs and raise sufficient capital to invest and to sustain their business. 
3) Do Africa-focused private capital fund managers typically utilise an onshore or offshore fund 
domicile location, or a mix of both? 
In general, clients prefer to domicile their funds in jurisdictions which are considered more politically 
stable with tax certainty, such as Mauritius or other offshore jurisdictions. Most of the managers we 
work with normally come in with an idea of where they want their fund to be domiciled but are open 
to exploring other options with favorable legal and tax incentives.
40
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africa4) What are some of the inhibitors preventing more private capital fund managers from making 
use of onshore jurisdictions to a greater extent?
I think it’s lack of familiarity. Specifically, it’s lack of understanding of the tax and regulatory environment 
along with uncertainty. I still think there’s a degree of volatility in many African jurisdictions that fund 
managers seek to avoid. 
5) Based on your experience and interaction with industry stakeholders, what are the key 
challenges associated with the formation and operation of funds as well as fund service providers 
in the African jurisdictions you’ve engaged with? 
There is little track record in many African jurisdictions of private equity vehicles, which means that 
the professionals do not understand the asset class. They are not able to advise because they have 
never been exposed to the industry. I therefore don’t think the relevant skills exist in many African 
jurisdictions. Similar to the analogy of the chicken or the egg, we need to get the activity going to 
enable the service providers to upskill themselves. You are not going to create a fund administration 
business in jurisdictions where there are not any funds.
6) What can be done to improve the attractiveness / competitiveness, service provision, and 
value add of both existing and new potential jurisdictions for both fund managers and investors?
I think it is a question of evolution. It’s a question of educating the institutions in those countries 
to ask for the asset class so that demand is created which fund managers and local professional 
advisors will respond to. The first local fund I worked on had a Delaware component, which forced 
me to learn on the job with international counsel. The same thing will probably happen in many other 
jurisdictions, where you’ll work with someone, you’ll get a bit of exposure you will take it on board 
and tweak it to your local regulatory environment. 
41
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaQ&A
with Rui Oliveira | CEO
BFA Asset Management
1) Can you tell us more about your organisation, your activity and role in the industry? 
BFA Asset Management (BFAAM) is a leading multi-asset investment management company in 
Angola, focused on active fixed income management. The firm was established in 2016 by the Banco 
de Fomento Angola (BFA), one of the largest private banks in Angola with 30 years’ experience in the 
financial services market. BFAAM’s headquarters are in Luanda; the firm’s leadership has a combined 
experience of 120 years in commercial banking, credit and debt capital markets. 
As one of the largest investment managers in the country, we are actively managing more than 
US$200 million in assets for high-net-worth individuals, pension funds and corporations. Our 
investment strategies include Short-Term Strategies, Exchange-traded Funds (ETFs), Equities, Credit 
and Alternatives.
Last year, we became the first asset management firm to launch an ETF in the market.
2) Currently, Luxembourg, Jersey, Bermuda the Cayman Islands and Mauritius are some of the 
most preferred jurisdictions for fund domiciliation. In your view, what makes these jurisdictions 
attractive for this purpose? 
The main factors that stand out for me are the regulatory framework and the taxation systems in 
most of these offshore jurisdictions. For instance, if I wanted to set up a hedge fund, I would go 
to the Cayman Islands instead of Mauritius because the legal framework in the Cayman Islands is 
well known to be a destination for such fund structures. The tax system in the Cayman Islands is 
additionally attractive to hedge funds as well. Another attractive element of a jurisdiction such as 
the Cayman Islands is that it is essentially a British Island, so you’re technically in Britain without the 
restrictions that come with setting up a fund in the country. This is one of the factors that LPs take 
into consideration. When you consider Mauritius, aside from the weather, is its favourable regulatory 
climate and the ease of setting up companies.  
3) As you may be aware, new financial centres in Africa have been set up in Nairobi and Kigali, 
which are looking to compete with the more established centres.  
Kigali is the future Cayman Islands. In my view, the Kigali International Financial centre will within 
the next five years be a good place to domicile funds or for investments in the capital market. I’m 
optimistic about what’s happening there in Kigali. 
4) What can be done in general to improve the attractiveness and competitiveness of newer 
financial centre in terms of service provision and value addition? 
In terms of attractiveness, we still have a long way to go. In terms of capital markets, most of the 
investors are more familiar with traditional savings products. What we are trying to do is to change 
42
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africathe mindset of local investors by introducing different types of investment solutions that matches 
our clients long term needs. However, we need also need to consider at macroeconomic data that 
influence our business profitability and risk exposure. 
Generally, we need more competitive capital markets one which promotes entrepreneurship and 
enables exponential growth. To achieve this we need to find a level plain field across the region 
that improves the regional regulatory landscape and allow markets integration, to keep attracting 
international investors. 
We also need to start structuring well the organization of our local companies - including audit 
information, governance, and compliance issues - so that they can fulfil all possible requirements 
in terms of governance. Finally, local governments across the continent must continue to push for 
greater intervention of development financial institutions in financing private markets. 
43
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaChallenges
Onshoring is increasingly popular globally; and Africa is no exception with definite 
potential for onshore financial centres for Africa-focused investment funds and 
vehicles. However, there are important challenges that hamper the domiciliation and 
operation of funds and fund management services on the continent. This section 
aims to explore the key challenges associated with the formation and operation of 
funds and fund management services in Africa. Challenges highlighted will be the 
most salient of those identified from a range of experts interviewed for this report.
Heterogeneity and Complexity of 
Regulatory and Legal Environments
Africa’s legal and regulatory environment ranks amongst 
the least business-friendly in the world. When asked 
about the major inhibitors of formation and operation of 
funds and funds management services, most of industry 
experts mentioned that regulatory issue is a serious 
concern. Indeed, diverse and complex regulatory and 
legal environment, as well as different political and legal 
systems make domiciliation and operation in Africa more 
difficult because no single approach can be applied 
to all countries. In addition, Africa has countries with 
civil law systems, common law systems and mixed law 
systems, and therefore, a one size fits all approach can 
never work for the entire continent. Accordingly, fund 
managers and services providers may find it difficult to 
scale up their operations across the continent. 
Further, the complexity of the legal and regulatory 
frameworks, and the absence of frameworks 
which traditional Africa focused investors are both 
comfortable and familiar with is a challenge. The lack 
of understanding of the tax and regulatory environment 
leads the international fund managers to view the issue 
of selecting a fund domicile as a tick box exercise: they 
will only choose the jurisdiction they are familiar with. 
Finally, the lack of appropriate regulation to support the 
development of the private capital sector is a challenge. 
Not so many countries have specific laws and regulations 
dedicated to the asset classes and operators, allowing 
them to better promote the industry in Africa. 
Predictability of Regulatory Changes
Perceptions that regulations are unpredictable, are likely 
to have a negative impact on the choice to domicile and 
operate in a jurisdiction. Indeed, the government’s lack 
of continuity and consistency in policy is a challenge as 
a cabinet reshuffle, for example, is a source of potential 
instability of tax and legal regimes. As a result, this 
unpredictability creates a prohibitive environment, 
where Investors often anticipate turmoil and lose 
confidence in regulatory frameworks. Availability of Skills
One of the most significant challenges for private 
capital investors and services providers in many African 
jurisdictions is the lack or scarcity of legal, financial, 
tax, and accounting advisors with proper knowledge 
of the private capital industry and a true understanding 
of the different asset classes. The African industry, 
which is relatively young compared to its international 
counterparts, does not have an extensive track record 
in private equity vehicle in many African jurisdictions. 
Therefore, the relatively low levels of sophistication 
are synonymous with low number of service providers 
and low service quality, the latter being one of the most 
important factors for choosing a fund domicile. 
Foreign Exchanges Issues
Although this issue is only valid for some countries, it 
does affect considerably their attractiveness. Many 
fund managers tend to avoid African jurisdictions with 
a certain degree of volatility and rather go somewhere 
stable, offering some reassurance to investors. 
Not so many countries 
have specific laws and 
regulations dedicated 
to the asset classes and 
operators, allowing 
them to better promote 
the industry in Africa. 
44
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaFuture of Funds 
and Fund 
Management 
services in 
Africa4
Legal and Regulatory Best Practice: Financial Centres Servicing 
Africa
Given the importance of legal and regulatory framework, many financial centres servicing Africa establish 
a special law and, in some cases, separate courts to handle issues peculiar to the financial centre. For 
instance, in Morocco, the Casablanca International Mediation and Arbitration Center (CIMAC) serves 
as a multilingual, independent adjudicator for companies operating in the region. Similarly, the Dubai 
International Financial Centre has its own civil and commercial laws, with the DIFC Courts serving as an 
independent administrator of these laws and the system. Having an independent body for mediation 
As more African countries continue to develop their major cities to the standard 
of International Financial Centres, key lessons can be drawn from what the 
renowned international financial centres have done to become attractive to 
foreign investment and fund domiciliation. As such, this section will draw key 
lessons from the characteristics of key financial centres globally. Similarly, experts’ 
opinion of what competitive financial centres should have will be discussed to 
provide a balanced and complete view on key lessons for prospective Financial 
Centres. Finally, we will provide a roadmap for the establishment of a competitive 
International Financial Centre and our expectations regarding the future of 
Financial Centres servicing Africa. 
Best Practices for the Development of Funds and 
Fund Management in Africa
These best practices adopted by prominent financial centres will be highlighted from 
the areas of Legal and regulatory framework, political and fiscal stability, Governance 
and Transparency, Tax regime, Depth and Breadth of Industry Clusters, Human 
Capital/Talent Competitiveness, and Proximity/familiarity and Reputation.
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Major financial centres around the world are known 
for their strong legal and regulatory frameworks, which 
make them standout for fund domiciliation purposes. 
Straightforward, targeted and business friendly 
legislation ensures a solid and stable foundation is in 
place for promulgation and protection of investment. 
Given the strategic importance of having a strong legal 
and regulatory framework to attract and incentivise private capital, most financial centres have put in place 
a competitive legal system that protect stakeholders 
without constraining financial activities. These financial 
centres are committed to international compliance, 
protecting financial stability, and encouraging investor 
confidence by maintaining transparency and promoting 
ethical financial practice. A selection of best practice in 
this regard includes:
46
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africaand arbitration ensures quick and efficient access to remediate action; boosts investor confidence in the 
right of complaint and administration of justice; and also provides a familiar legal environment that is in 
compliance with international standards. 
Further, Mauritius has created a regulatory environment that fosters innovation, financial inclusion, 
and financial stability by the Mauritian Economic Development Board (EDB). As part of the country’s 
efforts to regulate business activity for which there are no legal framework or adequate provisions under 
existing local legislation, Mauritius established a Regulatory Sandbox Licence under the aegis of the 
EDB for innovative projects including FinTech31. The country’s strong legal and regulatory framework 
is bolstered by its effort to ensure regulation keeps pace with innovation, serving as an additional 
competitive advantage to this African financial centre given the penetration of digital financial services 
on the continent. 
Legal and Regulatory Best Practice: Offshore Financial Centres
The establishment of several Regulator-to-Regulator agreements with other financial services market 
partners by the Jersey Financial Services Commission, which regulates and supervises financial activities 
at the Jersey International Financial Centre. These agreements are a critical competitive advantage to 
this jurisdiction, complementing the island’s existing internationally compliant regulatory framework. 
Agreements are in place with the UK, Jersey’s financial Cooperation with the Government of Kenya and 
the Framework for Return of Assets from Corruption and Crime to Kenya (FRACCK). These agreements 
assist in the management of multi-jurisdictional investment funds and also enable greater procedural 
efficiency for complimentary entities within the financial ecosystem, both domestically and internationally.
The sophistication of Luxembourg’s corporate law framework, which makes the small European 
country particularly attractive to investors and service providers looking to structure international 
investment projects. Luxembourg’s corporate law allows multiple structuring options (public limited 
liability company (SA), private limited liability company (SARL), corporate partnership limited by shares 
(SCA), co-operative company in the form of a public limited liability company (Coop-SA), common limited 
partnership (SCS), Special limited partnership (SCSp), Solely for SIFs and RAIFs ) which accommodate 
the needs of international investment projects. Luxembourg has a distinctive toolbox of investment 
vehicles (such as Unregulated Funds, reserved alternative investment fund, Specialised investment 
funds, Investment company in risk capital) coupled with its modern Securitisation Law, as well as its 
Credit Guarantee Law. The Cayman Islands, which has a strong legal framework, is also based on UK 
Common Law with a specific division of the Cayman Courts dedicated to financial services cases that 
has the UK Privy Council as the ultimate court of appeals.
Tax Framework
Tax regime is another important factor that investors 
consider before domiciling in a financial centre. Most 
financial centres attempt to build a tax neutral territory 
that will not only be simple but also transparent for 
fairness and proper planning. Financial centres also use tax as a key incentive tool to attract foreign investment 
and fund domiciliation. Most financial centres rely on 
double taxation agreements of the host territory to 
eliminate multiple taxation for its member firms. 
47
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaTax Best Practice: Offshore Financial Centres
Financial centres at the onshore market are known for their attractive tax system which does not levy 
multiple tax liability on investors. Most offshore financial centres offer a tax system with benefit from 
multiple double taxation treaties, tax incentives like tax holidays, lower corporate tax or tax exemption 
for certain activities that are beneficial to financial services industry. Most key financial centres have 
special tax regime to attract foreign investors to the centre. Singapore has a business-friendly tax system 
given its double tax agreements with 97 entities21 and zero capital gain tax. Although, Singapore levies a 
corporate tax of 17% for most entities, it may levy a lower tax of 5% on income from certain high growth, high-
value-added activities, such as services and transactions relating to the bond market, derivatives market, 
equity market, and credit facilities syndication. A broader range of financial activities are levied with a tax 
of 13.5% while activities like international treasury and fund management, corporate finance and advisory 
services, economic and investment research and analysis, and credit control and administration are subject 
to 8% corporate tax22. Jersey also offers a competitive tax regime that supports financial activities at its 
centre. Jersey offers a zero corporate income tax with exceptions to financial service companies which are 
taxed at 10%. However, other companies like utility companies, property development and large corporate 
retailers are taxed at 20%. The centre does not charge capital gains or inheritance tax. Firms and investors 
in Jersey enjoy its double taxation treaties with 27 territories.
Tax Best Practice: Financial Centres Servicing Africa
From taxation perspective, UAE, Mauritius, and Jersey have a laudable tax regime which include a 
zero or low corporate tax, zero capital gain tax, low VAT, and double taxation agreement with multiple 
territories. UAE has a best combination of taxes and incentives, given its exemption for corporate tax 
(40-year) and investment income tax, relatively low VAT (5%) and a widest double taxation treaty with 
139 territories.
Future financial centres can adopt a corporate tax holiday over a long period similar to UAE (Dubai) 
40-year and Saudi Arabia (Riyadh) 50-year tax holiday. This can attract corporate entities and investors 
and give firms at infant stage opportunity to grow or expand before being subject to corporate tax. 
Another best tax practice from these financial centres is the adoption of zero capital gain tax which 
can be another incentive to attract investors to the financial centre. The host countries of future 
financial centre should also sign double taxation agreement with multiple territories. 
48
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaQ&AQ&A
with Marlon Chigwende | Managing Director
Admaius Capital Partners
1) What impact (if any) does the choice of fund domicile have on fundraising, fund operational 
efficiency and performance?
The choice of fund domiciliation can affect fund operational efficiency in terms of the tax 
competitiveness of a jurisdiction. And this is because fund managers want to be in a tax efficient 
jurisdiction. From this perspective, Rwanda touches on a lot of the things that we have classified as 
crucial, including increasing political stability, rule of law, availability of skilled human capital, good 
tax incentives, strong rule of law. 
On fund performance, fund managers’ investment strategy will largely determine the performance 
of the fund.
2) Have you utilised an onshore or offshore fund domicile location, or a mix of both? 
Our fund is domiciled onshore, in Rwanda. However, some of the top management staff in our firm 
have experience from both onshore and offshore jurisdictions. 
3) What makes the most popular jurisdictions (such as Jersey, Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, etc.) 
so successful?
These jurisdictions enjoy long-standing records and investors are familiar with them. They have 
attractive and simple tax systems with multiple double taxation treaties. These jurisdictions are also 
known for their political stability and availability of top-quality professional service providers including 
accounting firms, law firms and fund administrators. These jurisdictions additionally provide support 
services for easy business registration. These offshore jurisdictions have strong regulations and rule 
of law, including strong anti-money laundering laws and KYC requirements that give confidence to 
counterparties to a fund.
4) How likely are you to consider emerging or lesser-known jurisdictions for fund domiciliation, 
and why?
Our experience in Rwanda has to date been very positive. I would recommend Rwanda to fund 
managers considering onshore domiciliation.
49
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaQ&A
with Siongo Kisoso | Managing Director
BK Capital
1) Does the profile of LPs you target while fundraising influence your choice of fund domicile, and 
if so, how?
Certainly. It’s one of the key considerations that fund managers have to consider when making 
a decision on fund domiciliation. I think that compliance is also another key factor that significantly 
influences the choice of fund domicile. For instance, we have seen in the recent past that some issues 
which some jurisdictions have had, with regard to compliance, have affected fundraising for structures 
that are domiciled there. As such, the compliance of the jurisdiction is a very key consideration that 
fund managers should consider when thinking about LPs, and their choice of fund domicile.
Another important consideration is ESG. LPs are increasingly tending to prefer jurisdictions which 
are working towards ESG. Other considerations are around the image that a particular jurisdiction 
has built over the years. In other words, how a particular jurisdiction is perceived, and how familiar 
investors are with this jurisdiction are key factors. For example, if you are targeting LPs in the US, they 
are very familiar with the jurisdictions like Delaware, Cayman Islands, Bermuda, etc. And likewise if 
you are targeting European investors, these may be familiar with other European jurisdictions. As 
such, the image and knowledge of the jurisdictions is of high importance. 
2) For the majority of private capital funds you manage (or are currently fundraising for), have you 
utilised an onshore or offshore fund domicile location, or a mix of both? 
Our funds are currently based onshore - in Rwanda - given that our target investors are regionally 
based and are more familiar with onshore jurisdictions. However, for our new funds, we are 
considering an offshore feeder fund driven by interest from a new group of investors who are not 
familiar with our onshore strategy.
3) Which country or market do you view as the most attractive fund domicile in Africa, and why?
For us, Rwanda is the most attractive location for fund domiciliation for several reasons, including 
its history of having a sound and predictable legal and regulatory environment, especially with the 
development of the Kigali International Financial Centre. We have also benefited from Rwanda’s 
political stability, security, and tax competitiveness. Mauritius is another attractive jurisdiction, given 
its history of political stability and familiarity among investors. Morocco is also an ideal location for 
funds targeting investors in North Africa, however the foreign exchange restrictions in the country 
are a challenge.
4) What are some of the inhibitors preventing more private capital fund managers from making 
use of onshore jurisdictions to a greater extent? 
For South Africa, the major concerns are associated with political instability, physical insecurity, 
uncertainty around the state of the economy, and corruption. Similarly in Kenya, it is a lack of a well-
developed regulatory framework. With Morocco, the main challenge with Morocco is the presence of 
foreign exchange controls in which restrict the flow of foreign currency in the country. In Mauritius, the 
recent blacklisting of the country proved to be a challenge. Despite the country being reinstated, it 
takes time for people to change their perception. Nonetheless, Mauritius is a good jurisdiction. Overall, 
I think that Rwanda is one of the most competitive as it has most of the requirements necessary to be a 
jurisdiction of choice for funds, however investors are not yet familiar with the jurisdiction. 
50
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaPolitical and Fiscal Stability, Governance and Transparency
Another important factor that attracts foreign investors 
and fund domiciliation to a financial centre is political and 
fiscal stability. Political and fiscal stability is a bedrock for 
foreign investment as it enhances investors’ confidence 
and provides a conducive environment for businesses 
to thrive. As such, most of the key financial centres are built on a stable political and fiscal system of the host 
territories. Governance and transparency complement a 
country’s political and fiscal stability. While governance 
and transparency are measured at country level, it 
provides a solid base to protect investors and enhance 
strategic planning for firms at the financial centre. 
Political & Fiscal Best Practice: Financial Centres Servicing Africa
Jersey, Saudi Arabia, and UAE have strong score in Government effectiveness, regulatory quality, and 
political stability according to the World bank Worldwide Governance indicators data 2021. Across all 
the metrics, Jersey is the most competitive international finance centre among the key centres servicing 
Africa. Jersey has a politically stable government which is made up of its elected parliament and judicial 
system. The Island has its own independent legal, administrative, and fiscal systems and is not part of 
the any major political group like the UK, Great Britain, or EU. The ability of Jersey to determine its own 
laws, raise taxation, and hold elections is based on long-standing constitutional precedent. 
Political & Fiscal Best Practice: Offshore Financial Centres
Most financial centres at the offshore are established in an environment with high level of political 
and fiscal stability. Major financial centres in Luxembourg, Singapore, Jersey, Guernsey, Bermuda 
have enjoyed political and fiscal stability over a long period which a strong fundamental factor for their 
recognition and popularity. Luxembourg and Singapore are good examples of territories that have 
leverage on their political and fiscal stability to attract investors to their financial centres. Both countries 
have politically stable environment with a very low public debt. These countries have strong rating 
of AAA with a stable outlook from all top rating firms (S&P, Fitch, and Moody)23 which highlights the 
consensus from the global financial community on their political and economic stability. Further, while 
Luxembourg was ranked in the top 5% most politically stable countries in the world, Singapore was in 
the top 3% of the most politically stable destinations in the world in 202124 according to the World Bank 
Governance indicator survey for political stability in 202125. In addition, Luxembourg and Singapore were 
ranked 9th and 4th (out of 180 countries) respectively by the Transparency International in corruption 
perception index. This underscores high quality of governance and transparency in these countries.
Depth And Breadth of Industry Clusters
Financial centres across the globe attempt to build a 
business hub that will attract multiple high quality global 
financial services firms and other professional service 
providers. They tend to build an ecosystem where 
financial services firms can network and collaborate within the centre. Most financial services centres put 
in place infrastructures and framework that will attract 
commercial banks, investment banks, investment 
consultants and advisors, accounting firms, law firms, 
fund administrators, and other financial services firms. 
Industry Clusters Best Practice: Financial Centres Servicing Africa
For financial centres servicing Africa, South Africa (Johannesburg), UAE (Dubai), and Jersey have 
strong depth in their financial services cluster. These financial centres have multiple fund managers, 
professional service firms, banks, and insurance companies available in their markets. South Africa is 
particularly strong in terms of availability of fund managers, professional services firms, insurance 
companies, and ranks first among the onshore financial centres. Jersey has remained a top 
destination for investment funds while Dubai financial centres has provided attractive incentives since 
its establishment in 2004 to attract financial services firms. 
51
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaIndustry Clusters Best Practice: Offshore Financial Centres
Offshore financial centres are known for creating a business hub that include multiple professional 
service firms that support core financial and investment activities. The development of funds and 
fund management industry in a particular territory depends on the availability of critical financial 
service providers like commercial banks, investment banks, law firms, accounting firms, consulting 
firms, trustees, custodians, and others. Most financial centres in our review have built an ecosystem of 
financial services firms which have made the centres competitive for fund domiciliation and formation. 
Cayman Finance centre has multiple financial service firms including Banks, Insurance and Reinsurance 
firms, capital market operators, fund administrators and trust. Specifically, Cayman Islands had about 101 
banks, 139 trust companies, 686 insurance companies as at December, 202132. Dublin is another financial 
centre with strong depth in market cluster, the centre is a host to over 450 firms in the areas of Aviation 
Financing, Banking, Corporate Treasury Operations, Fund and debt listing, Insurance and Reinsurance, 
Investment Management, Investment Banking, Payments, Ratings Agencies, Trading Platforms33. 
Bermuda has also attracted firms from banking, investment management, insurance, fund administration, 
trust. The Island has over 168534 firms providing financial services to local and foreign investors. As a 
top financial centre, Singapore is a host multiple global firms with likes of JP Morgan, UBS, PwC, Deloitte 
forming part of over 168 professional firms at the centre35. Singapore is in the top 10 destinations in 
the areas of Banking, Investment Management, Insurance, professional services, Finance, Fintech, and 
Trading according to the Global finance index report in 202236.
Human Capital or Talent Competitiveness 
Another key factor that attracts foreign investment and 
fund domiciliation to a financial centre is the availability 
and access to high quality talent. Availability of top 
talents also make it easy for global firms to expand to a financial centre. The most successful financial centres 
have in place policies that will not only attract but also 
retain top talents at the centre. 
Talent Competitiveness Best Practice: Financial Centres Servicing 
Africa
Financial centres serving Africa have put in measures that make them attractive to highly skilled 
professionals. Among these financial centres, Dubai, Riyadh, and Mauritius are particularly strong in talent 
competitiveness. Dubai is highly rank in attracting talents given its internal and external openness to 
labour, conducive work environment and zero personal income tax. Mauritius’ key strength for talent 
competitiveness is in the area of retaining talent. Mauritius provides talents with robust lifestyle and a 
sustainable environment through pension coverage, social protection, and brain retention. 
Morocco’s Casablanca finance city also introduced ‘Taechir one-stop-shop’, dedicated to the CFC 
business community, this platform simplifies and fast track the procedures for processing foreign work 
permit applications37. Overall, external, and internal openness, conducive and sustainable environment 
are good practices that can support talent competitiveness. 
52
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaTalent Competitiveness Best Practice: Offshore Financial Centres
Renowned financial centres for fund domiciliation are known for attracting top professionals which include 
local and international professionals. They have liberal laws which include easy process of obtaining 
work permit for foreign professionals. Some financial centres also benefit from their closeness to other 
countries with top quality talents such as Luxembourg which enjoys talents from Germany, France, and 
Belgium. With the recent increase demand for digital skills as much as traditional financial skills, financial 
centre like Singapore has embarked on a strategy to build a future-ready workforce comprising a strong 
Singaporean Core complemented by a pool of deep and diverse global talent. Monetary Authority of 
Singapore (the regulator of the financial centre) has been working with financial institutions, institutes 
of higher learning, and other government agencies to expand its local talent pipeline and build a strong 
Singaporean Core. 
Proximity, Familiarity & Reputation
Investors are also attracted to financial centres which 
are close to markets/region that are of interest to them. 
Some financial centres are strategically located to serve 
investors or markets from multiple continents. Apart from 
proximity, familiarity and reputation are key factors that 
make a financial centre popular for fund domiciliation. Investors are generally comfortable domiciling their 
funds in certain financial centres that they understand 
which can be in form of language, clients base, previous 
experience, popularity, understanding of the financial 
centre, international recognition among other factors. 
Establishing Familiarity Best Practice: Financial Centres Servicing 
Africa
These financial centres have their unique benefit in terms of their respective location. However, financial 
centres in UAE, Jersey, Mauritius, and South Africa have consolidated their unique location to attract 
investors by developing their financial markets. These centres have built a strong reputation over the 
years which makes them popular for foreign investment and fund domiciliation in Africa. Reputation 
is driven by the level of innovation, cultural diversity, city brand and appeal according to the Global 
Finance Index. 
Jersey, Mauritius, South Africa (Johannesburg), and UAE (Dubai) are popular among investors for fund 
domiciliation, these centres have built reputation among the global investors’ community stemming from 
their attractiveness to foreign investors in terms of cultural diversity, city brand and appeal, closeness 
to other developed market. South Africa’s first mover advantage in private capital activity and relatively 
developed capital market have supported its popularity and reputation among foreign investors. 
Mauritius stands out among others in terms of reputation and familiarity, many African-focused fund are 
domiciled in Mauritius given its closeness to the continent while offering a long-standing competitive 
benefit like other developed financial centres. 
Rwanda (Kigali) is on course to become a strong financial centre given its recognition as one of the 
top 15 financial centres with a reputational advantage according to the global finance index 2021. 
According to the Index, a high reputational advantage may be due to strong marketing, or awareness 
of a centre’s existing or emerging strengths. Having highlighted that, it is important for Rwanda (Kigali) 
financial centre to support their successful impression with genuine improvements in their underlying 
competitiveness. 
53
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaEstablishing Familiarity Best Practice: Offshore Financial Centres
While proximity is a natural factor that is unique among financial centres, financial centres can use 
their unique location to attract investors who are particularly interested in investment opportunities in 
their neighbouring countries/region. Funds in financial centres also have investment products that are 
marketable in countries/regions that are close to them. For example, Guernsey funds with a Guernsey 
manager are marketable in both EU and EEA member states. Cayman Islands also use its master-feeder 
structures (using a combination of Cayman domiciled master funds and a combination of Cayman or 
non-Cayman feeders) to attract investors from other countries especially the US.
Future financial centres can improve their familiarity and reputation which come from consistency 
in maintaining a high-quality rules and regulations that enhance financial services and protect key 
stakeholders in the market. Most notable financial centres have built a reputation that makes them 
popular for fund domiciliation and fund management. Reputation can come from building a positive 
track record that potential investors can refer to whenever they seek investment opportunities or 
fund location. It can also be built through creating a trusted business environment. Financial centres in 
Guernsey, Singapore, Luxembourg have built a strong reputation over the years through the stability in 
their business environment.
Summary of Best Practices
The history of the world’s most renowned International Financial Centres has 
shown that several countries have taken key initiatives at different points in time 
of their development to become leading centres for international financial services. 
Therefore, the understanding of key requirements for setting up and developing a 
vibrant and successful IFC can be drawn from the best practices adopted by the 
prominent financial centres. The following steps emerge as key requirements.
1 Political and fiscal stability:
Most popular international financial centres are known 
for operating in a politically stable environment. The 
long-term political and fiscal stability of the country in 
which they are established, is a strong fundamental 
factor for their recognition and popularity as it enhances 
investors’ confidence and provides a conducive 
environment for businesses to develop.
2 Business Friendly Regulation:
The legal and regulatory framework is very critical to 
the success of a financial centre, and so is the role of the regulator. Most global financial centres facilitate 
the transactions through business-friendly rules. The 
regulator should provide clear rules stating the activities 
and restrictions, and enabling greater procedural 
efficiency in the set up and operations of the entities 
at the centre. In addition, some key practices that 
renowned international financial centres have done 
to become attractive for foreign investment and fund 
domiciliation include: 
a. A sophisticated corporate law framework which offers 
multiple structuring options, and a distinctive toolbox 
of investment vehicles accommodating the needs of 
international investment projects.
b. An establishment of Regulator-to-Regulator 
agreements with other financial services market 
54
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africapartners to assist in the management of multi-
jurisdictional investment funds and also enable 
greater procedural efficiency.
c. A regulatory environment that fosters innovation and 
financial inclusion given the penetration of digital 
financial services in Africa.
d. An independent legal, administrative, and fiscal 
systems which is not part of the any major political 
party.
3 Competitive Tax Regime
A common point to all renowned International Financial 
Centres is the high level of competitiveness of their tax 
regime. In order to make an IFC successful, a competitive 
tax regime along with an ease of filing returns need 
to be provided. The regulator can introduce multiple 
tax incentives and other mechanisms, such as low (or 
exemption of) corporate rates and Tax holiday over a 
long period to attract corporate entities and investors 
and give firms at infant stage opportunity to grow or 
expand before being subject to corporate tax.
4 Alternative Dispute Resolution 
Mechanism
International Financial Centre needs a quick and efficient 
Alternative dispute resolution mechanism, as financial 
disputes cannot wait for years in the court of law for 
judgement. It is therefore critical for an IFC to provide 
for a reputed and independent body for mediation 
and arbitration to ensure quick and efficient access to 
remediate action, to boost investor confidence in the 
right of complaint and administration of justice, and to 
provide a familiar legal environment that complies with 
international standards.5 Human Capital and Talent 
Competitiveness
IFCs need skilled professionals as it provides the 
centre with the requisite operational efficiency and 
thereby brings in interest and enables cross border 
transactions. Internal and external openness to labour, 
conducive and sustainable work environment, and 
competitive personal income tax contribute to attract 
top local and international professionals, to support 
talent competitiveness and to expand depth of financial 
services cluster which is critical for the development 
of the funds and fund management industry. However 
historical data suggest that talent is flexible and gets 
also attracted to a centre/city which provides quality 
of life. An IFC to be successful needs to address this 
by venturing into high quality and very attractive 
global infrastructure, in order to bring in cross-border 
transactions.
6 Strong Reputation:
Although reputation is among the key considerations 
for fund domiciliation and operation in a jurisdiction, 
it is undoubtedly the area that can only develop with 
time and experience. For instance, developing a strong 
reputation for an IFC requires to build a positive track 
record that potential investors can refer to and by 
put in place a strong marketing, or awareness of the 
centre’s existing or emerging strengths. The centre can 
also build reputation through the creation of platforms 
for dialogue to assist the development of standards 
and benchmarks, which will improve the delivery of 
sustainable financial services among stakeholders.
To be successful, an 
IFC needs to venture 
into high quality and 
very attractive global 
infrastructure in order 
to bring in cross-border 
transactions.
55
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaQ&A
with Samuel Salako | Partner 
DLA Piper
1) What impact (if any) have you observed amongst the private capital fund managers you’ve 
worked with on the choice fund domiciliation has on fund operational efficiency and performance?
There has been significant impact. A lot of fund managers are looking for operational efficiency, and 
as such they look for jurisdictions which offer service providers who can provide the sort of services 
that fund managers need. In some jurisdictions, you will find these kinds of services here and there, 
but in some other jurisdictions, there are entities which have provided these services for years. 
In terms of performance, it also goes back to things like taxation. If fund managers are looking at 
performance or profitability, they are very likely to look at the regulatory interface because this 
impacts profitability. If the regulatory environment is heavy, fund managers must employ people who 
have to take care of these issue, and this will come out of the fund’s returns.  So, if fund managers 
have a place where tax is not particularly friendly, because of duties, capital gains tax and corporation 
tax, they have to look at the impacts of all these things. Fund managers will look at all the conditions 
which can potentially have an impact on the fund performance.  Furthermore, heavy regulatory 
environments also affect efficiency. Fund managers want to concentrate on returns on the portfolio 
companies, and don’t want to have to engage so many people in the regulatory side of things. Fund 
managers just want to concentrate, maximise the business returns and make sure the business is 
doing well. 
2) What are some of the inhibitors preventing more private capital fund managers from making 
use of onshore jurisdictions to a greater extent, including South Africa, Kenya, Rwanda, and 
Morocco? If possible, please identify particular challenges by market.
The first thing that I would mention is foreign exchange issues. Foreign exchange is an issue for 
a place like South Africa since you have to go through certain regulation to be able to repatriate 
funds. Heavily regulated environments are another issue that applies to some jurisdictions. However, 
independent of how heavily regulated an environment is, you have also to look at other issues that 
result from the labour laws or the corporate structures of a certain jurisdiction. For example, setting 
up an office in Nigeria there are requirements in terms of staff, directors, days they have to spend 
within the country etc. However, in a lot of favourable jurisdictions, you do not have this sort of 
requirements. Corporate structures which allow you to not be physically present tend to be more 
favourable. Legal structures that tend to require less bureaucracy, and as such they tend to be more 
cost efficient, are also preferable among fund managers  
3) Having engaged with multiple financial centres and jurisdictions globally, what makes the most 
popular jurisdictions so successful? What best practice from international financial centres would 
support the growth of African jurisdictions?
This is my favourite question, and that’s because I am one of those people that try to advocate for 
Africa as much as possible. I believe that Africa has a lot going on for it, if only countries can just be 
more business friendly, and be looking at things from a global perspective. In this framework, the 
56
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africaquestion is what makes some jurisdictions perform better than others? And I have already mentioned 
the importance of regulations, and different legal structures. Many financial centres in Africa seem 
to have the traditional legal structure for entities - just partnerships or companies – with different 
rules that either require you to be present or to make certain fillings. However, if you look at other 
jurisdictions, you do not have this kind of requirements. For example, you do not need a lot of minimum 
capital or you do not need to be present or any sort of filings. Ease of setting up a company, ease of 
localisation and operational efficiency for people who are not based in that particular jurisdiction is 
critical. A lot of legal reform must be carried out by onshore financial centres in order to support the 
creation of entities that require the least amount of management and operational time. In some cases, 
the amount of time required for a company to remain compliant does not contribute to its operational 
efficiency. Therefore, we need laws which enable foreigners to easily set up legal entities which, for 
instance can own property, with very minimal reporting obligations. The corporate structures need to 
be nimble enough to cater to any arising need. 
Overall, fund managers want certainty, ease of setting up their structures, and ease in doing business, 
especially where they have limited resources. These successful and well-known jurisdictions have 
legal structures that cater for anything that may be required. Jurisdictions such as the Cayman Islands 
are thriving because they have an enabling regulatory environment with legal structures nimble 
enough to cater to any arising need.
57
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaQ&Awith Ashford Nyatsumba | Partner, Investment 
Funds Group and Co-Deputy of Private Equity 
Sector  
and Michael Denenga | Partner, Investment 
Funds Group
Webber Wentzel
1) Do Africa-focused private capital fund managers typically utilise an onshore or offshore fund 
domicile location, or a mix of both?
It really depends on the jurisdiction the fund managers are operating out of. For example, in the 
Southern African context, most fund managers are quite happy with onshore structures since 
they have tried and tested a jurisdiction, and the investors are increasingly familiar with these 
environments. South Africa is a good example of where onshore structures are prevalent because 
it is a sophisticated market which investors understand and are familiar with. However, in some 
African countries where private equity is still relatively new, fund managers are more likely to prefer 
an offshore location since the local infrastructure is not yet developed to international standards. 
Furthermore, institutional investors such as development finance institutions push to have funds 
domiciled in jurisdictions that they are familiar with, thus creating a natural preference for offshore 
domiciliation. So, ultimately, it’s a mix of onshore and offshore fund domicile locations. 
2) How can new jurisdictions become more competitive since familiarity is also a key? 
Any new international financial centre should take lessons from the more established financial 
centres globally. The most important thing about a financial centre is that it needs to shield investors 
from any country specific issues. Financial centres in newer jurisdictions should provide investors 
with incentives such as tax incentives or agreements and legal structures which guarantee investor 
protection. 
It is additionally critical for emerging international financial centres to facilitate international cooperation 
and compliance with international initiatives - such as the Organisation for Economic Cooperation 
and Development’s information sharing requirements and the Multilateral Instrument that will enable 
better implementation of multinational tax avoidance, . Once the international standards have been 
complied with, then they can investigate local ways to make the financial centre more attractive to 
ensure that they attract the right investors. For example, a financial centre should ensure its legal 
framework allows for fund structures that are familiar to investors or that local exchange control 
provisions are not too stringent as this can create an administrative burden for funds. 
Finally, international financial centres should make provision for an effective international arbitration 
regime as a dispute settlement mechanism for foreign investors.  
3)]How has standard practice in fund administration evolved, particularly with the use of 
technology in the provision of support services?
Fund administrators in particular are starting to take on a more holistic role than they did previously. 
Increasingly, fund managers are looking more to administrators to assist with regulatory compliance 
58
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaLessons Learned & Recommendations: Experts’ 
View
In order to have a holistic view on fund domiciliation in Africa and competitiveness of 
international financial centre, we interviewed a range of experts to get their view and 
perspective around a series of critical questions spanning from the consideration for 
fund domiciliation, the effect of domiciliation choice on operational efficiency and 
performance of funds, the factors limiting fund domiciliation in the onshore to the 
solutions for onshore development.
Consideration For Fund Domiciliation
According to our respondents, the key considerations 
for fund domiciliation in a jurisdiction include availability 
of capital, familiarity with fund vehicles. Other factors that 
determine where a fund will be domiciled are political 
stability particularly for portfolio companies, ability to 
exit the market in a tax efficient manner, depth of local 
capital market, sound legal and regulatory environment.Impact of Investment Strategy on Fund 
Domiciliation
Our respondents highlighted that target investors 
usually determine where a fund will be domiciled. As 
such, fund domiciliation is largely shaped by investors’ 
preference. They mentioned that Investment strategy 
around legal vehicle or structure may determine where requirements and to oversee reporting obligations. The way that fund documents, and specifically the 
key terms therein, have evolved indicates that there is a bigger call from investors for transparency 
with more regular reporting. So, nowadays the managers want quicker and on demand kind of 
data provision from their service providers. As such, administrators are using more sophisticated 
technology and AI to plug in that gap and help fund managers to fulfil those requirements. 
4) What are your views on the medium to long term future development of the industry? Are there 
any current trends, investment strategies or current practice you anticipate remaining prevalent?
ESG considerations will remain a relevant topic globally and particularly in Africa because the capital 
allocators on the continent are predominantly development finance institutions who are mandated 
to integrate ESG considerations into their investment strategies. Furthermore, investment strategies 
which are focused on social issues such as gender lens investing (amongst others) will continue 
attracting investor interest because their impact is easily measurable. 
We also anticipate that funds focused on infrastructure, technology and food security will continue to 
attract investor interest on the continent. Finally, based on the recent experience with the COVID-19 
pandemic and its effect on private capital activity on the continent, more fund managers will be 
looking to establish funds with longer lifespans.
59
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africaa fund will be located as some jurisdictions have laws 
that restrict the available options for funds. For instance, 
a particular jurisdiction may have laws that limit fund 
structure to just trust or a limited company.
Effects of Domiciliation Choice on 
Operational Efficiency and Performance of 
Funds
According to our respondents, the macroeconomic 
conditions of the host territory affect the fund’s 
operational efficiency and performance. They 
particularly highlighted that volatility in host country’s 
currency affects investment return. They also highlighted 
the cost associated with the regulatory requirements 
of a jurisdiction and the impact of domiciling fund in 
a jurisdiction that is not tax efficient. Another impact 
of fund domiciliation on operational efficiency and 
performance may come from domiciling fund in an 
environment where it is difficult to access competent 
service providers (especially for specialized areas like 
derivatives, hedge funds) which has huge negative 
effect on general cost and operations of a fund.
Preference for Fund Domiciliation (Offshore 
vs Onshore)
Our respondents believe that the investors prefer to 
domicile their funds offshore rather than onshore. 
However, LPs in South Africa prefer funds domicile in 
South Africa as the market is robust for private capital 
investment. Investors in other African countries and 
international institutional investors prefer offshore for 
fund domiciliation since they are more familiar with 
those jurisdictions. Factors Limiting Fund Domiciliation In 
Onshore Jurisdictions
On factors that are limiting the use of onshore 
jurisdiction for fund domiciliation, our respondents 
believe that investors dictate where a fund will be 
domiciled. According to them, investors’ choice is 
shaped by their familiarity to the offshore jurisdictions 
which are generally stable politically and economically. 
Unlike the offshore centres, onshore centres are not 
popular among investors and there is high degree of 
uncertainty in business environment on the onshore. 
They also highlighted that investors lack proper 
understanding of tax and regulatory framework of the 
onshore jurisdictions. Other limiting factors include lack 
of sufficient data to monitor past record in many onshore 
jurisdictions and lack of sufficient professionals.
Solutions for Onshore Development
Having recognised that onshore jurisdictions are 
not popular for fund domiciliation, our respondents 
suggested factors that can increase uptake of onshore 
jurisdictions. One of their suggestions is that onshore 
jurisdiction can offer a parallel vehicle which involves 
a combination of offshore vehicle and one or two 
onshore vehicles under one overall fund. Other 
factors recommended by our respondents to support 
onshore development include efficient tax system, less 
administrative process, reduced process around work 
permit for foreigners.
Outlook on the Future Development of Financial 
Centres Servicing Africa
According to the global financial centres report 2022, the main areas of 
competitiveness for financial centres are business environment, infrastructure, human 
capital, reputation, and financial sector development26. These areas are expected to 
be the focus of most financial centres, as well as their preparedness to position for 
emerging investment themes relating to environment (climate related investment), 
technology and digital innovation including fintech, and diversity, equity and inclusion. 
60
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaWhile basic 
infrastructures will 
remain critical in 
future development, 
digital infrastructure 
will be an integral 
part of future 
development in 
financial centre.
As new financial 
centres emerge, 
the desire to build 
a strong reputation 
will increase 
competition among 
financial centres 
especially those in 
the same region. Future development in financial centres is expected 
to be driven by a dynamic business environment 
which can accommodate changes in financial industry. 
Regulatory frameworks are likely to change to address 
the emergence of different investment opportunities 
as financial centres have a laudable role to play in 
encouraging these investments. Regulatory framework 
may start to emphasize on the importance of:
• the integration of social and environmental issues in 
businesses’ decision-making and reporting, along with 
the need for responsible finance,
• the support to technology and innovation across 
several industries, and balance cost and protection
• the support to activities promoting diversity, equity, 
and inclusion as well as other UN’s Sustainable 
Development Goals.
Another factor that will shape future development 
in financial centre is infrastructure. While basic 
infrastructures will remain critical in future development, 
digital infrastructure will be an integral part of future 
development in financial centre. Financial centres 
are expected to put in place necessary technology 
that will meet the future need of investors and will 
provide services and support via special platforms or 
applications.
As global financial market develops, financial centres 
will have to offer an excellent living standard, which 
will help to attract top professionals. This may also 
include special visa for professionals with unique skills 
that support the growth of the financial centres. Further, 
financial centres may shift from full physical proximity 
of firms at a location to a hybrid model where a 
financial business has its registered location in a 
particular financial centre, but its workforce widely 
dispersed.
Future development may come through building 
reputation through the creation of platforms for 
dialogue to assist the development of standards 
and benchmarks, which will improve the delivery of 
sustainable financial services among stakeholders 
(Financial centres, Regulators and innovators, financial 
service providers, the public sector, private sector, 
and civil society). As new financial centres emerge, 
the desire to build a strong reputation will increase 
competition among financial centres especially those 
in the same region. Competition may come in form of 
city brand and appeal, innovation, cultural diversity, and 
comparative positioning with other centres.
61
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaBenchmark Analysis 
of Key Financial 
Centres and  
Markets  
Servicing  
Africa5
Regulatory, Legal, and 
Tax environment
An Overview of Other Key Markets in Africa
Regulatory, Legal and Tax Environment
Regulatory Framework
Regulatory Framework 1
Country Entities Regulator Law Licencing  
(Yes / No)SenegalInvestment Funds N/A Law of Commercial Companies 
and Economic Interest Grouping 
(2014) and Investment CodeYes
BanksGhanaInvestment Funds Security and 
Exchange 
CommissionSecurities Industry Act 2016 (Act 
929)Yes
Funds Managers and Operators
Investment AdvisorsEgyptAlternative Investment Funds Egyptian 
Financial 
Regulatory 
Authority (FRA)Egyptian Capital Market Law 
(ECML)Yes
Investment Advisors
Financial Intermediaries
InvestorsAngolaAlternative Investment Funds Angolan 
Capital 
Markets 
Commission 
(CMC)Collective Investment 
Undertakings Law (2019)Yes
Investment Advisors
Financial Intermediaries
Venture Capital Investors, Funds, 
and EnterprisesVenture Capital Collective 
Investment Undertakings Law (2019)YesNigeriaCapital Market Operators Securities 
and Exchange 
Commission 
(SEC)Investments and Securities Act 29 
(2007) 
Companies and Allied Matters Act 
(2020)Yes
Investment Funds
Investment Advisers & Solicitors
Fund/Portfolio Managers
Credit Rating Agencies
63
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaRegulatory Framework 2Egypt• Must be an Egyptian capital corporation (FM, FA ).
• Must be licensed by the FRA (FM, FA ).
• Alternative funds include open-end funds, closed-end funds, Index funds, real estate investment funds, income 
funds, money market funds, charitable funds and Sharia-compliant funds (FV).
• Investment funds must be in the form of a joint stock company (FV).
• Banks and Insurance companies may undertake investment funds activities either solely or with a third party, 
subject to relevant regulatory approval (FV).
• Individual or institutional investors in a closed-end fund must be “qualified investors” and meet specific financial 
solvency and technical criteria (I). 
• Investors in open-end funds may be ordinary individuals and institutional financial investors (no qualification 
requirements (I).Angola• Foreign fund managers must be properly authorised to conduct managerial activities in Angola, have a local 
establishment, and are subject to the same rules established for national managers or advisers (FM).
• Must be licenced or authorised by the CMC (FV, FA ).
• Subject to rules applicable to Alternatives Investment Funds (AIFs), notably those relating to the protection of the 
investors’ interests (FM, FV).
• Must be managed and represented by a third party (managing entity) that is incorporated in Angola and has its 
main interests and effective management located in the country ( FV).Senegal• Foreign investors structured as investment funds, open-ended investment companies and Undertaking For 
Collective Investment In Transferable Securities (UCITS) must apply for approval with the WAEMU Regional 
Council for Public Savings and Financial Markets (FI).
• To benefit from country level incentives or warranties, the Investments Code imposes the following obligations 
on investors for approved companies (I):
 ✓Provide annual information on the level of implementation of the approved investment programme.
 ✓Declare the start-up date of the approved activity.
 ✓Submit a summation of realized investment operations.
 ✓Allow the control of the conformity of its activity.
 ✓Send statistical information to the national statistical services.Ghana• Hedge fund, private equity or venture capital fund managers must be licenced by the Security and Exchange 
Commission and act in accordance with the specified purpose ( FM). 
• Applicants for fund management licence 38 must be a company, fit and proper to manage the fund, have 
minimum capital as determined by the Commission and be able to comply with financial resources guidelines 
(FM).
• May be structured as mutual funds (open-ended or closed ended), and unit trust ( FV). 
• Other funds type include Money Market fund, Equity fund, Fixed income funds, income funds, balanced fund, 
index fund, specialty funds (real estate, commodities or in selective areas like socially responsible ventures) 
and fund of funds ( FV).
• Can only be set up as a company incorporated under the Companies Act or an external company which is a fit 
and proper person with a place of business in Ghana ( FV).
• Qualified investors include any government, public institution including a central bank, or any other multilateral 
agency, public and private pension funds, endowments, trusts and other institutional investors, asset managers, 
financial institutions, insurance companies, investment funds ( I).Nigeria• Must comply with the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and other relevant 
regulations ( I).
• Can be established in the form of Unit Trusts, Venture Capital Funds, Open-ended Investment Companies, 
Real Estate Investment Schemes and Specialized Funds ( FV).
• Must be licenced by the Securities and Exchange Commission ( FM, FA )
• Must be registered under the Companies and Allied Matters Act ( FM, FA ).
64
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaRegulatory Framework – IncentivesEgypt• Preferential tax regime (i.e. double-tax treaty) if that treaty provides for any particular exemptions ( I).
• Tax exemptions applying to specific returns on investment ( FV):
 ✓Dividends of investment funds whose investments in securities and other debt instruments are not less 
than 80%.
 ✓Profit distribution of holding funds whose investment is limited to the aforementioned funds.
 ✓Returns on investment from money market funds.
 ✓Return on bonds listed in the stock exchange (excluding treasury bonds).
 ✓Profits of the investment funds whose activity is limited to monetary investment onlyAngola• Stamp Duty tax exemptions on capital increases, management fees (including the consumption tax placed on 
management fees) and on fees due to depository institutions holding securities ( FM).
• Dividends paid between resident companies in Angola may be exempt from Investment Income Tax provided 
that a 25% stake is held for a minimum holding period of one year ( FM).
• Alternative investment funds (AIFs) are exempt from Investment Income Tax, Urban Property Tax, Stamp Duty, 
Consumption Tax on bank commissions, and Stamp Duty on capital increases ( FV). 
• Open-ended real estate AIFs are exempt from Property Transfer Tax and Stamp Duty on acquisition of real 
estate ( FV).
• Income obtained by a resident, non-resident or pension fund Alternatives Investment Funds unit holder is 
exempt from Investment Income Tax and Corporate Tax on any income obtained, namely those from redemption 
or distribution of income, as well as gains from the sale of units ( I).Senegal• No restriction on income and capital repatriation (FV).
• No restrictions on foreign ownership in most sectors (I)
• No restriction on foreign exchange transaction (I).
• Specific benefits are available based on negotiation between the investor and Government (I).Ghana• Venture capital tax incentives ( FV):
 ✓Relief from stamp duty in each year on subscriptions for new equity shares in venture capital funds.
 ✓Interest and dividends from investment in a venture capital company are subject to tax at 1% for the first ten 
years of assessment.
 ✓Chargeable income is subject to tax at 1% for the first ten years of assessment.
 ✓Carry forward of losses for five years after the year of disposal.
• Carry forward of losses from disposal of investment in a venture capital subsidiary for five years after the ten 
years of assessment ( I).Nigeria• No restrictions on foreign exchange transactions for investors with Capital Importation Certificate ( FM, I). 
• Zero restrictions on foreign ownership ( FM, I).
• Capital gains tax exemption for government securities ( FM, I).
• Benefits arising from regional economic integration (ECOWAS) and investment promotion agreements ( FM, I).
• Capital gains tax exemption for government securities ( FV)
• Capital gains tax exemption from the disposal of shares, subject to conditions ( FV).
• 10% – 70% tax exemptions for interest payments on foreign loans with repayment period of two years and 
above ( FV).
65
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaLegal Framework
Legal Framework 1 – Guarantees39 Egypt• Right to access Egyptian courts.
• Guarantees against nationalization or confiscation of investment projects under the law’s domain.
• Guarantees against seizure, requisition, blocking, and placing of assets under custody or sequestration.
• Guarantees against full or partial expropriation of real estate and investment project property.
• 100% foreign ownership of investment projects.
• Right to remit income earned in Egypt and to repatriate capital.Angola• Right to access Angolan courts.
• Right to report illegal activities against such authorities before the Public Ministry.
• Rights of industrial and intellectual property under existing legal terms.
• Right to compensation (as determined by law) in case of expropriation.
• Guarantee of non-intervention by the State.Senegal• Equal treatment of foreign investors and local investors.
• Provision of foreign exchange for transactions.
• Protection from expropriation and nationalization.Ghana• Guarantee against expropriation of foreign investments and provides a platform for safeguarding such 
investments.
• Protection of privacy of the individual and personal data by regulating the processing of personal information.
• Guarantees registered businesses the unconditional ability to transfer abroad in freely convertible currency 
through authorised dealer banks, among others, the dividends or net profits from their equity investments; 
payments in respect of the servicing of foreign loans; and the proceeds from the sale of any investment (net of 
all taxes and other obligations).Nigeria• Right to re-patriate profits (net of taxes) and dividends attributable to the investment.
• Guarantees against expropriation of any foreign investment or compelled surrender of interest.
• Protection of business secrets as well as individual and corporate data.
Legal Framework 2 – Economic SubstanceEgypt• Must be an Egyptian capital corporation (i.e. a company limited by shares or a JSC), with a minimum paid-in 
capital of EGP5 million ( FM).
• Must be in the form of a joint stock company (JSC), with an issued and paid-in capital of not less than 2% of the 
size of the investment fund and a maximum of EGP5 million or its equivalent in hard currency. Issued capital 
may exceed the said maximum through increases after incorporation ( FV).
• Must be Egyptian and licensed by the FRA ( FA)
• Non-local service providers cannot operate without a legal presence in Egypt ( FA).Angola• Must have in place several internal policies aimed at addressing the risk of its activity, remuneration issues, 
outsourcing, internal control and evaluation of the assets pertaining to its funds under management ( FM).
• Employees of the fund manager with technical functions, as well as the management, shall have the proper 
qualification and professional aptitude in accordance with high level standards ( FM).
• Must be managed and represented by a third party (managing entity) that is incorporated in Angola and has its 
main interests and effective management located in the country ( FV).
• Minimum capital of 40 million Kwanzas ( FV).
66
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaLegal Framework 2 – Economic SubstanceSenegal• Registered capital requirements for investment funds range between XOF50 million and XOF250 million ( FV).Ghana• Private Funds must have an initial minimum fund size of GHS10 million before the Securities and Exchange 
Commission can grant a licence ( FV).
• Private Funds must have an initial minimum fund size of GHS10 million before the Securities and Exchange 
Commission can grant a licence (FV).
• In a joint venture between a Ghanaian and a foreign shareholder, the foreign shareholder is required to make 
a minimum equity capital contribution of USD200,000. 
• A wholly foreign owned venture requires a minimum equity capital contribution of USD500,000. The minimum 
foreign capital investment required to set up a trading enterprise in Ghana irrespective of whether it is wholly 
or partly owned by a non-Ghanaian entity is USD1 million. Nigeria• Private equity funds with a minimum commitment of NGN1billion must be registered with the Nigerian Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC) in accordance with the rules and regulations of the SEC.
• Private equity funds in which pension fund assets are invested must be SEC-registered regardless of their size. 
For the private equity fund to be registered, the fund’s manager must be licenced by the SEC.
• The fund manager must have at least 3 sponsored individuals (that is, the principal officers and professionals 
held out by the fund manager as experts on whose advice or actions investors are expected to rely) who must 
be registered with the SEC.
• The rules are the same for venture capital fund managers, the difference being that the fund manager of a 
venture capital fund must have a minimum paid-up share capital of NGN20 million (SEC Rules), whereas private 
equity fund managers are required to have a minimum paid-up share capital of NGN150 million.
Legal Framework 3 – General Restrictions40Egypt• No statutory foreign currency controls. Nevertheless, in practice, the Central Bank of Egypt organizes the 
transfer of foreign currency into Egypt or abroad thorough issuing circulars.
• In case of closed-end, the transfer of investors’ interests is restricted until the liquidation of the AIF or listing in 
the stock exchange. For open-end AIF, the transfer can take place on the same day.Angola• Fund managers cannot grant loans, execute certain transactions on their own account, or execute transactions 
relating to the assets held by the investment fund with related parties, e.g., entities of its group, the depositary, 
etc. 
• Limitations established on foreign investment, which place constraints on transfers abroad of profits or 
dividends obtained in Angola.
• Restrictions around foreign ownership of assets and companies.
• In the case of foreign investments, private investors are subject to the “Angolanisation” policy. Organisations 
with more than five employees can only hire foreign nationals if their staff is composed at least 70% Angolan 
employees.Senegal• Limited foreign ownership within some sectors.Ghana• Limited foreign ownership in upstream petroleum and mining sectors.
• Limited foreign ownership in joint venture to 90% equity participation.
• Payment service provider or an electronic money issuer to have at least 30% Ghanaian ownership. 
• Foreign owned enterprises are required to employ at least 20 skilled Ghanaians.Nigeria• Restrictions on foreign ownership in Oil & Gas.
• Foreign investors are not allowed to directly acquire real property except through a registered company in 
Nigeria.
67
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaTax Framework
Tax Regulation
Country Actors CIT IIT VAT DTAASenegalFund Managers 30% (Financial 
Activities)30% (Financial Activities) 17% 23
Fund Vehicle
Fund Administrator
InvestorsNigeriaFund Managers 30% 10% 7.5% 15
Fund Vehicles
Fund Administrators
InvestorsGhanaFund Managers 25% 25% 12.5% 16
Fund Vehicles
Fund Administrators
InvestorsEgyptFund Managers 22.5% 5-10% WHT (resident 
corporate shareholders)14% 57
Fund Vehicles
Fund Administrators
Investors 2.5% - 25% 
(individual investors)10% WHT (non-resident 
corporate shareholders)
20% WHT (Royalties, 
Interests, Services, Fees)22.5% (corporate 
entities)AngolaFund Managers 25% 5-15% on capital gains, 
interest and dividends or 
Exempt14%, with 
reduced 
rates on 
specific 
sets of 
transactions2
Fund Vehicles 7.5% (AIFs investing 
in securities or 
financial assets)
15% (AIFs investing in 
real estate)Exempt
Fund Administrators N/A N/A
Investors Exempt Exempt
68
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaProfessional Landscape and Talent Competitiveness
Professional Landscape
Country Fund Managers* PSF* Banks Insurance
Angola <10 <10 26 20+
Egypt 56 18 39 32
Ghana 19 7 23 51
Senegal <10 <10 27 20
Nigeria 48 24 24 59
* Source: Preqin, Fund Managers and PSF based in the country.
Talent Competitiveness
Country GTCI Rank Enable Attract Grow Retain
Angola 130 129 103 126 129
Egypt 86 87 112 76 90
Ghana 95 67 90 101 101
Senegal 107 96 88 125 94
Lagos 109 117 110 106 123
Source: Global Talent Competitiveness 2022 (INSEAD, Human Capital Leadership Institute and Portulans Institute)
69
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaEndnotes
1 EMPEA & FSD Africa & UK Aid, 2015. Conduits of Capital
2 Z/Yen Group & China Development Institute, 2022. Global Financial Centres Index 32
3 Cliffe Dekker Hofmeyr (CDH), 2022. Ready For Take Off: Kenya Introduces A Tax Incentive For Carbon Trading
4 Fund Managers licenced within a “Recognised Jurisdiction” may also establish or manage funds in the DIFC, in lieu of 
obtaining an operating licence from the DFSA.
5 The Rwandese government have cultivated a Strong Dispute Settlement framework, with the country being members of 
the Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes, a signatory to the New York Convention on the Recognition 
and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards Act, a member of the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency of the World 
Bank, and a signatory to Mauritius Convention and Singapore Convention.
6 These economic substance requirements only apply to fund manages of collective investment schemes, which also 
require prior approval of the regulator (the FSCA).
7 Please note the restrictions outlined in this table only apply to Fund Managers and Investors.
8 With the exception of South Africa (which applies individual capital gains tax rates to some investment entities), investment 
laws in the surveyed jurisdictions do not distinguish applicable tax rates by actor. As such, the tax rates outlined in this 
table apply equally to Fund Managers, Vehicles, Administrators and Investors, unless otherwise specified.
9 This exemption from corporate income tax is applicable for the first five consecutive fiscal years, after which a standard 
rate of 15% applies.
10 While Saudi investors do not pay corporate income tax, they are subject to a mandatory 2.5% tax (“Zakat”) on net current assets.
11 A corporate income tax of 20% applies to international investors in Saudi Arabia. However, the Saudi Arabia General 
Authority of Zakat and Tax (GAZT) has not assessed any taxes on private equity funds in Saudi Arabia or the investors in 
those funds since 2006. Please note this is historical precedent but does not constitute a formal exemption - the Authority 
reserves the right to begin tax funds at any point (including on a retroactive basis).
12 The corporate income tax in South Africa will be 27% for tax years ending on or after 31 March 2023. 
13 WILEY, 2021. Digital Skills Gap Index
14 Z/Yen Group & China Development Institute, 2022. Global Financial Centres Index 32
15   Why is Jersey a leading IFC?2022 https://www.jerseyfinance.je/  
16 Sectors, 2022 https://www.jerseyfinance.je/
17 Public debt rating, 2022 https://te.public.lu/en/dette_publique
18 World Governance Indicator, 2021 https://info.worldbank.org/
19 Access To Talent, 2021 https://www.luxembourgforfinance.com/  
20 Global Innovation Index, 2021 https://www.wipo.int/edocs/
21 PwC, 2022. Tax Summary Singapore  
22 PwC, 2022. Tax Summary Singapore  
23 The Government of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, 2022. Public Debt Rating
24 World Bank, 2021. Worldwide Governance Indicators
25 World Bank, 2021. Worldwide Governance Indicators
26 Z/Yen Partners and the China Development Institute, 2022. The Global Financial Centres Index 32
27 The Global Financial Centres Index 32, 2022 https://www.longfinance.net/media/documents/
28 Rule of Law Index, 2022 https://worldjusticeproject.org/rule-of-law-index
29 Kigali International Financial Centre Annual Report, 2021 https://www.rfl.rw/docs/KIFC2021
30 Kigali International Financial Centre Annual Report, 2021 https://www.rfl.rw/docs/KIFC2021
31 Mauritius Economic Development Board, 2019. Regulatory Sandbox Licence: Guidelines for FinTech Projects
32 Cayman Islands Monetary Authority, 2021. CIMA Fact Sheet
33 International Financial Services Centre, 2022. Why Ireland?
34 Bermuda Monetary Authority, 2022. Regulated Entities
35 The Investment Management Association of Singapore, 2022. Member List
36 Z/Yen Partners and the China Development Institute, 2022. The Global Financial Centres Index 32
37 Casablanca Finance City, 2019. CFC Africa Insights: Human Resources Trends in Africa
38 In Ghana, Fund management licences are only valid for one year and renewable on an annual basis.
39 Please note the guarantees outlined in this table only apply to Fund Managers and Investors.
40 Please note the restrictions outlined in this table only apply to Fund Managers and Investors.
70
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaAcknowledgment
The Funds and Fund Management Services Report was developed in collaboration with a consortium of industry 
experts that shared key lessons learned and recommendations of best practice for the development of the Funds 
and Fund Management Industry in Africa.
We would like to thank Admaius Capital Partners, BFA Asset Management, BK Capital, Bowmans, Olajide Oyewole 
LLP (A member of DLA Piper Africa), Webber Wentzel, World Alliance of International Financial Centers, Casablanca 
Finance City, Jersey Finance, Kigali International Financial Centre, Nairobi International Financial Centre and 
Luxemburg For Finance, for their invaluable contribution.
71
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaE avca@avca-africa.org
W www.avca.africa
C www.avcaconference.com
T +44 (0)20 3874 7008Contact AVCA
37 North Row, 3rd Floor
London W1K 6DHContact Rwanda Finance Limited
Kigali / Rwanda
BPR-PCD Tower, 4th FloorFor further information, please contact
research@avca-africa.org
E info@rfl.rw
W www.kifc.rw
T +250 786 422260

Extracted from: 02115-avca-kifc-funds-report_9-part1.pdf
Funds and Fund 
Management 
Services in  
Africa
Part 1
Research 
PartnerMARCH 2023Contents
Executive Summary 3
Section 1: Evolution of the Private Capital Ecosystem  
in Africa 12
The Development of Private Capital in Africa 13
A Contemporary View: Private Capital in Africa at Present 15
Section 2: Overview of Private Capital Activity In Africa 21
Evolution of Private Capital Activity in Africa 22
Growth Drivers of Private Capital in Africa 28
Regional Spotlights 30
Future Trends 51
2
Executive 
Summary
Africa’s private capital industry has shown significant development in the last two 
decades. Investment funds constitute one of the main drivers of local and international 
capital flow into African economies and have led to the emergence of key service 
providers such as asset managers, fund managers and trust and corporate service 
providers. 
The Funds and Funds Management Services in 
Africa report examines the deal intermediary and 
(financial) service provider ecosystem servicing 
Africa’s private capital industry. Driven by proprietary 
data, complimentary research and in-depth interviews 
with representatives from relevant stakeholders, this 
examines the past, present and future of the service 
providers, jurisdictions, business and legislative 
landscape underpinning private capital in Africa. It finds 
the industry on the cusp of a transition to sophistication 
and depth in every regard: the number of capital 
allocators actors raising private funds, a widening 
ecosystem of service providers offering ancillary 
support services, and a broadening array of asset 
classes coming to the fore, accompanied by innovative 
fund structures.  
Background to the Paper
The purpose of this report is firstly to map the continental 
ecosystem, showcasing the fund managers, fund 
administrators and fund types active therein, as well as 
the breadth of investment opportunities. More specially, this report gives a regional breakdown of the investment 
opportunities available to local and international capital 
allocators, with a focus on fund domicile and asset 
consolidation. Secondly, this report sheds light on the 
range of International Financial Centres (IFCs) available 
on the continent, providing a comparative analysis of 
the activities and support services on offer by African 
financial centres in relation to their international 
counterparts. 
This explicitly Africa-focused lens is a unique feature of 
the Funds and Funds Management Services in Africa 
report, comparing key financial centres servicing the 
region from the perspective of their value and benefit to 
local and international investors alike. The report is both 
an exposition and celebration of over 20 years of private 
capital in Africa. Our hope is it serves to illuminate the 
ever-expanding investment opportunities available in 
Africa; serves as a guide for fund services available to 
industry practitioners enabling the accessibility of these 
opportunities; and finally serves as a useful tool to help 
inform domiciliation decision making decision making.
Evolution of the Private Capital Ecosystem in 
Africa 
The report opens with an exploration of the evolution 
of Africa’s private capital ecosystem, charting the 
development of private capital in Africa. It adopts a 
historical lens to understand the current configuration 
of Africa’s private capital landscape, looking at the 
individuals, institutions and macroeconomic trends 
responsible for its birth. Key findings from this historical 
deep dive include:
• Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) played an 
instrumental role in the creation and development 
of Africa’s private equity industry by providing capital 
for private projects and adopting a capacity building, 
advocational role.
• The first wave of Africa-focused private equity firms 
emerged in South Africa in the early 1990s, given the 
country’s relatively strong legal structure and stable 
economy.• By 1997, a total of 12 private equity funds which have 
cumulatively raised over US$1 billion were active in 
Africa.
• A combination of the rise of alternatives, regulatory 
liberalization, improved structure and the potential 
for relatively high returns saw the preponderance of 
the DFI model giving way to some degree in favour of 
more commercial and institutional capital flows from a 
range of global investors.
Having contextualised the emergence of private 
capital in Africa, this section of the report then 
adopts a contemporary view. It profiles the changes 
in geographic, strategic, sector and asset foci of the 
industry’s founding fathers and earliest adopters, 
concluding with the profile of investment vehicles 
available in Africa’s private capital industry.
4
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaProfile of Fund Managers
Geographic Focus of Private Capital Funds 
in Africa, 2002-2022 H1
Pan-Africa Regional Country Speciﬁc
Sub-Saharan Africa22%4%
32%42%
21% 14%
33%32%2002-2011
2012-2022 H1
Only final closed funds that focus solely on Africa or have an 
allocation to Africa alongside a broader emerging markets 
investment mandate are included in this analysis. Funds with 
a global investment remit that invest in Africa are excluded.Source: AVCA Source: AVCAInvestment Stage Focus of Private Capital 
Funds in Africa, 2002-2022 H1
14%4%
14%
8%
3%53%
14%
4%
4%45%2002-2011
2012-2022 H1
Venture Capital Growth Capital Buyout
Replacement Infrastructure
Real Estate GeneralistPrivate Debt4%
6%10%1%16%
5
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaFIGURE 5:  Sector Focus of Private Capital Funds in Africa, 2002-2022 H1
Generalist Sector-Speciﬁc66%
54%34%
46%
2002-2011 2012-2022 H1
Source: AVCA
Traditional Fund Structures Emerging Fund Structures
General Partnership
Limited Partnership
Limited Liability Partnership
Bewind or Vested Trust (South Africa)
Master-Feeder FundPermanent Capital Vehicles (PCVs)
Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs)
Special Purpose Acquisition Companies 
(SPACs)
Protected Cell Companies (PCCs).Profile of Fund Structures in Africa
6
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaRegional Spotlights of Private Capital Deal Activity in Africa: 2016 – 2022 H1Overview of Private Capital Activity in Africa 
Central 
AfricaEast  
AfricaNorthern 
AfricaSouthern 
AfricaWest  
Africa
US$2.1 billion  
total value of private 
capital deals US$3.6 billion  
total value of private 
capital deals US$4.9 billion  
total value of private 
capital deals US$5.9 billion  
total value of private 
capital deals US$8.1 billion  
total value of private 
capital deals 
32  total volume of 
private capital deals333  total volume  
of private capital deals150  total volume  
of private capital deals483  total volume of 
private capital deals538  total volume of 
private capital deals
Private Equity 
top asset classVenture Capital 
top asset classVenture Capital 
top asset classPrivate Equity 
top asset classVenture Capital 
top asset class
DR Congo most 
active countryKenya most active 
countryEgypt most active 
countrySouth Africa 
most active countryNigeria most 
active country
Consumer 
Discretionary 
and Financials  
most active sectorFinancials  most 
active sectorConsumer 
Discretionary 
most active sectorFinancials  most 
active sectorFinancials  most 
active sectorThe metamorphosis of Africa’s private capital landscape 
since the emergence of the industry in the early 1990s 
is the focus of this chapter of the report. It provides an 
overview of the evolution of private capital activity in 
Africa by exploring the factors that have historically 
contributed to the impressive growth of the industry 
within the region. Some of the growth drivers of private 
capital in Africa include:
1. Liberalisation and Market-Oriented Reform: 
targeted efforts by several African governments 
in the early 2000s to restore political stability, 
improve macroeconomic conditions, and undertake 
microeconomic reforms.
2. Economic Performance & Resilience: the continent’s 
relatively strong economic performance in the early 
2010s, coupled with its resilience to global economic 
headwinds including the 2008 global financial crisis 
and more recently the Covid-19 pandemic.
3. Demographic Dividend: Africa’s population has 
more than doubled since the turn of the century, creating an infrastructure gap that presents a unique 
prospect for investors.
4. Consumer Oriented Market: Africa’s exponential 
population growth has concurrently led to the 
emergence of a consumer middle class which is 
projected to reach 1.7 billion consumers by 2030. 
5. The African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA): 
the successful implementation of this agreements 
sees the consolidation of a US$1.3 billion market with 
a combined GDP of US$3.4 trillion and serves as a 
strong signal to investors wishing to make the most 
of an integrated Africa open for domestic and foreign 
investment. 
By investigating the evolution and drivers of private 
capital activity, this section of the report illuminates 
the influences behind how current investment trends 
have been shaped through the years. Some of these 
investment trends are summarised below, in a regional 
analysis of private capital activity in Africa:
7
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaAll Financial Centres Multiple Financial 
Centres Individual Financial 
Centres 
- Have a single regulatory 
body for investment funds, 
companies, investment 
advisors, fund administrators 
and investors.
- Have a license requirement 
for all financial market 
operators.
- Provide access to the host 
country’s network of double 
taxation agreements
- Provide tax incentives 
(although these differ in 
nature).- Have time bracketed tax-
related incentives.
- Have no currency exchange  
controls.
- Do not discrimiate between 
foreign and domestic 
investors.
- Have no restrictions on 
foreign employment. 
- Offer data protection for 
stakeholders.
- Offer intellectial property 
protection for stakeholders.
- Enshrine investor rights to 
compensation and access to 
courts.- Have independent and 
dedicated courts for dispute 
resolution (Casablanca, 
Dubai).
- Guarantee or have legal 
safeguards against 
expropriation (Mauritius, 
Nairobi, Riyadh and Kigali).
- Have incentives for carbon 
market investors (Nairobi).Doing Business for Funds and Fund Management 
in Africa 
The growth of Africa’s private capital industry obviously 
bodes well for the jurisdictions which host their funds. 
As the industry expands and matures, private capital 
firms are tasked with several strategic and operational 
decisions critical to their success: not just choosing 
partners, but identifying a suitable fund domicile. Section 3 of the report compares the competitiveness of 8 
financial centres servicing Africa, providing an analysis 
of their activities and the support services offered in 
comparison with their international counterparts. Key 
findings from this exercise include: 
In addition to their regulatory, legal and tax framework, these financial centres are further evaluated from the following 
indicators:Regulatory, Legal & Tax Framework
IFC PROFILE:  GFCI Rank
0 110 /ranking-star
UAE
17 Saudi Arabia
98Mauritius
92Kenya
105
Jersey
60Rwanda
100Morocco
54South Africa
65
Dubai received the highest rank amongst 
offshore domiciles serving African private capital 
firms on the Global Financial Centres Index.
Casablanca Finance City, first established in 2010, 
gives Morocco the highest ranking amongst 
onshore financial centres.
8
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaSouth Africa 339
289
277
129Jersey
UAE (Dubai)
Saudi Arabia
75
33Mauritius
Kenya
20
<10Morocco
Rwanda
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
UAE
250 110
Saudi Arabia
43Mauritius
51Kenya
97Rwanda
106
Morocco
96South Africa
77PROFESSIONAL LANDSCAPE: Fund Managers
TALENT COMPETITIVENESS: GTCI RankSouth Africa gives investors access to the largest 
number of fund managers (339) and is the only onshore 
financial centre rivalling the offshores in terms of high 
availability of fund managers. Jersey (289) and UAE  (277) complete the top 3 in terms 
of number of fund managers. Jersey has remained a top 
destination for investment funds while Dubai financial 
centres has provided attractive incentives since its 
establishment in 2004 to attract financial services firms. 
Dubai, Riyadh and Mauritius are the top 
ranked countries according to the Global Talent 
Competitiveness Index, 2021.
• Dubai owes its talent competitiveness to its ability 
to attract talent, reflecting its internal and external 
openness, conducive work environment and zero 
personal income tax. Dubai also performs well in 
enabling talent as it offers a strong regulatory, market, 
business and labour landscapes. • Riyadh owes its talent competitiveness to efforts spent 
in growing talent measured across three indices: 
formal education, lifelong learning opportunities and 
access to growth opportunities. 
• Mauritius’ strength lies in attracting and retaining 
talent, and this can be attributed to a robust 
sustainability and lifestyle, including social protection, 
pension coverage and environment performance. 
9
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaSources: Global Financial Centres Index 2022, Prequin, Global Talent Competitiveness 2022 (INSEAD, Human Capital Leadership Institute and 
Portulans Institute), and The Digital Skills Gap Index (DSGI) 2021UAE 2
28
55
70Saudi Arabia
Mauritius
Kenya
80
84Rwanda
South Africa
89 MoroccoRanking DSGI 
0 2 4 6 8 107.5
6.3
5.0
4.8
4.5
4.4
4.1TECHNOLOGICAL ENVIRONMENT: DSGI Rank
Technological development and digital skills are of 
critical importance for international financial centres: 
serving as a hedge against economic challenges on a 
global scale and as a competitive advantage in a world 
where technology has become essential to the fabric of 
“the new normal” following the Covid-19 pandemic. The 
Digital Skills Gap Index evaluates the digital strength, 
resilience, and responsiveness of ecosystems globally. 
In this framework:
• The UAE  ranks second (after Singapore) among the 
134 economies and territories included in the Index, 
scoring particularly well highly in the category of 
government support for bridging the digital gap 
as well as the level and availability of digital skills, 
where it appears leader worldwide.• Digital support in Rwanda was ranked among the 
top performers in the world, owing to the Rwandese 
government’s success in ICT promotion (ranked 2nd) 
and the importance of ICT in its vision (ranked 4th). 
• Government support was also a key strength for 
Kenya, but what set the country apart, is the ease of 
finding skilled employees, where Kenya is ranked 
among the 25 top performers globally. 
Future of Funds and Fund Management in Africa 
Key to ensuring the long-term success and sustainability 
of Africa’s private capital industry is the elimination 
of legal, political, and regulatory barriers that hinder 
the ease of doing business and deter private capital. 
Section 4 expands the comparative focus of the report 
to identify best practice from the characteristics of key 
financial centres globally. As more African countries 
continue to develop their major cities to the standard of 
International Financial Centres, some key lessons can 
be drawn from what renowned international financial centres have done to become attractive for foreign 
investment and fund domiciliation. The following 
roadmap emerge as key requirements:
Political and fiscal stability:
1. A long-term political and fiscal stability to enhance 
investors’ confidence and provides a conducive 
environment for businesses to develop.
10
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaBusiness Friendly Regulation:
2. A business-friendly environment that provides 
clear rules stating the activities and restrictions, and 
enabling greater procedural efficiency in the set up 
and operations of the entities at the centre.
3. A sophisticated corporate law framework: to allow 
multiple structuring options and a distinctive toolbox 
of investment vehicles which accommodate the 
needs of international investment projects.
4. The establishment of several Regulator-to-
Regulator agreements with other financial services 
market partners: to assist in the management of 
multi-jurisdictional investment funds and also enable 
greater procedural efficiency for complimentary 
entities within the financial ecosystem, both 
domestically and internationally.
5. A regulatory environment that fosters innovation, 
financial inclusion, and financial stability: to ensure 
regulation keeps pace with innovation and serve 
as an additional competitive advantage to African 
financial centre given the penetration of digital 
financial services on the continent.
6. An independent legal, administrative, and fiscal 
systems which are not influenced by political interest.
Competitive Tax Regime:
7. A competitive Tax Regime with key features such as 
low (or exemption of) corporate rates and Tax holiday 
over a long period: to attract corporate entities and 
investors and give firms at infant stage opportunity to 
grow or expand before being subject to corporate tax.Alternative Dispute Resolution Mechanism:
8. An independent body for mediation and arbitration: 
to ensure quick and efficient access to remediate 
action, to boost investor confidence in the right 
of complaint and administration of justice, and 
also provide a familiar legal environment that is in 
compliance with international standards.
Human Capital and Talent Competitiveness
9. Internal and external openness to labour, 
conducive and sustainable work environment and 
competitive personal income tax: to attract top 
local and international professionals, support talent 
competitiveness and expand depth of financial 
services cluster which is critical for the development 
of the funds and fund management industry.
Strong Reputation:
10. Develop a strong reputation by building a positive 
track record that potential investors can refer to and 
by putting in place a strong marketing, or awareness 
of the centre’s existing or emerging strengths.
11. Build reputation through the creation of platforms 
for dialogue: to assist the development of standards 
and benchmarks, which will improve the delivery of 
sustainable financial services among stakeholders.
As new financial centres 
emerge, the desire to 
build a strong reputation 
will increase competition 
among financial centres
11
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africa1
Evolution of the 
Private Capital 
Ecosystem in 
Africa
Capital For Private Projects. DFIs active in Africa prior 
to the early 1990s shared an impact-first commitment to 
private sector development, doing so primarily via loans 
in government-initiated development projects to build 
businesses, create jobs, and sustainably improve the 
living standards of poorer communities. Figure 1 below 
highlights some examples of development projects 
that met these strategic objectives and were therefore backed by DFI capital. At the start of the new decade, 
however, this cohort of DFIs broadened the scope 
of their engagement on the continent by extending 
funding to projects initiated by the private sector1. They 
began making direct investments in private companies 
independent of government sponsored initiatives, 
pivoting to provide equity capital to these companies in 
addition to historically preferred debt capital.A historical lens is critical to understanding the current configuration of Africa’s private 
capital landscape, whose origins can be traced to the early 1990s. Development 
Finance Institutions (DFIs) played an instrumental role in the creation and development 
of Africa’s private equity industry when private sector capital was scarce for African 
fund managers. Their catalytic role can be summarised as follows:
African Development 
Bank (AfDB) *
1979: Tedzane Fall 
Hydro-Electric, Malawi. 
(Power)
1981: Projet Théicole 
dans les Communes 
Nshili & Kivu, Rwanda. 
(Agriculture)British International 
Investment (BII) **
1964: Kenya Tea 
Development 
Authority, Kenya. 
(Agriculture)
1988: Natex Holdings 
Ltd, Eswatini. 
(Manufacturing)European Investment 
Bank (EIB) ***
1985: Sonel Mape 
Energy Project, 
Cameroon. (Power)
1985: Port De 
Bejaia, Algeria. 
(Transportation)International Finance 
Corporation (IFC) ****
1960: Kilombero 
Sugar Co., Tanzania. 
(Agriculture)
1976: SME loan to 
Kenya Commercial 
bank to lend to smaller 
local companies, 
Kenya. (Financials)FIGURE 1:  African Development Projects with DFI Backing, Pre-1990
Advocacy and Capacity Building. In addition to 
providing capital for projects initiated by the private 
sector, the DFI community in Africa adopted an 
advocational role in the industry. Hoping to demonstrate 
the benefits of privatising assets and private sector 
investment, DFIs worked in tandem with government 
officials on the sub-national level to increase their 
openness to private sector development; institute pro-
business reform that better supported SME growth; 
and reduce the legislative complexity surrounding 
foreign direct investment2. Their history and experience 
in the region positioned them as a conduit between 
governments and businesses, introducing both to the 
benefits of private capital and creating a foundation that private equity practitioners used as a springboard to 
enter the market. The first wave of Africa-focused private 
equity firms emerged in South Africa in the early 1990s, 
given the country’s relatively strong legal structure and 
stable economy3. However, as other economies in Africa 
grew and investment opportunities in other regions 
increased, private equity funds with wider geographical 
mandates were established, deploying capital in 
countries like Botswana, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Kenya, 
Mauritius, Zambia, and Zimbabwe4. Figure 2 highlights 
early industry pioneers: chronicling the emergence 
of Africa’s first private capital funds, the institutional 
investors that supported them, and the geographies 
these funds covered.The Development of Private Capital in Africa
* African Development Bank Data Portal
** CDC Group, 1999. Report & Accounts
*** European Investment Bank, 2022. Financed Projects: 1959 – 2022
**** International Finance Corporation, 2016. IFC The First Six Decades: Leading the Way in Private Sector Development
13
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africa1984 1991
1994
1996
19971995FIGURE 2: Timeline of Africa’s First Private Capital Funds
Initially known as FirstCorp Capital Partners, Ethos  is 
established by founding partner Andre Roux in South Africa 
and becomes Africa’s first private equity fund, managing the 
US$100 million capitve fund of First National Bank. In 1992, 
Ethos raise Ethos Fund II , the first non-capitve private equity 
fund in South Africa.Brait Capital Partners  is launched in South Africa, raising the 
country’s first close-ended, third party funded private equity 
vechicle. 
Tuninvest is launched in Tunisia as an investment and 
financial services company. Later, under advisement from 
the Dutch Entrepreneurial Bank (FMO), Tuninvest expands its 
geographical remit to include sub-Saharan African markets, 
and becomes AfricInvest .
South African Infrastructure Fund  reaches first close May 
1996. African Infrastructure Investment Managers (AIIM)  
are appointed as fund manager in 2000. 
A total of 12 private equity funds which have cumulatively 
raised over US$1 billion now active in Africa.Cauris Management  launch Cauris Investissement , a joint 
initiative by the West Africa Development Bank and European 
DFIs. The fund is the first subregional private equity fund to be 
established in Francophone West Africa.
The Dutch Entrepreneurial Development Bank  (FMO) 
launch the Seed Capital Fund alongside local partners and 
commercial banks. ZAR 116 million  
country-focused fund (two investments 
between 1992 and 1997). ZAR200 million  
million single sponsor, country-focused fund 
(30 investments between 1991 and 1994).
EUR 2.3 million  
country-focused private equity fund raised 
via IPO on the local stock market, backed by 
both FMO and Proparco.
ZAR1.855 billion 
country-focused fund investing in toll road 
concessions. The fund later becomes the first 
20-year infrastructure fund in South Africa.XOF5 billion 
(EUR7.6 million) regional fund providing risk 
capital within the eight member states of the 
West Africa Economic and Monetary Union 
(WAEMU).
Regional fund that sought to create small 
SME funds in countries like Cameroon, Côte 
d’Ivoire, Ghana, Kenya, Tunisia, Zambia, and 
Zimbabwe. The fund also provided technical 
assistance for local investment managers 
to later become experienced private equity 
fund managers.
1998
Nigeria’s first PE fund manager, African Capital Alliance launch 
its first fund (CAPE I)Mustard Capital Partners , a private equity fund management 
company, is incorporated in Ghana as a unit within Fidelity Bank 
and launches its first fund.
US$40 million  
country-focused fund. US$8.5 million  
generalist private equity fund focused 
providing equity and debt for Ghanian SMEs.Fund Profile: 
Fund Profile: 
Fund Profile: 
Fund Profile: Fund Profile: Fund Profile: 
Fund Profile: 
Fund Profile: 
14
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaInvestor Diversification From Traditional Asset 
Classes. The global financial crisis of 2008 precipitated 
a shift in investor interest away from traditional asset 
classes such as public equities and fixed income whose 
investment value fell significantly, towards alternative 
investment vehicles5. Given Africa’s relatively low 
integration in the global economy at the time, the 
impacts of the financial crisis manifested mainly in 
depressed external demand, declining remittances 
and low commodity prices, which led to sell off across 
major indices and weakened investor confidence. 
Stock exchanges in Africa’s largest and most integrated 
economies witnessed significant contractions in 2008, 
such as Egypt (-55.10%), Nigeria (-45.77%), Mauritius 
(-35.38 %), Kenya (-35.33%), and South Africa (-25.72%)6. 
Motivated by a desire for diversification (both by 
asset class and geography) and competitive returns, 
domestic and international investors turned their gaze 
to private equity and venture capital opportunities on 
the continent.
Commercial and Institutional Capital Come to the 
Table. The diversification of actors investing and 
operating in Africa’s private capital ecosystem has 
multiplied significantly in recent years. As the depth 
and breadth of actors actively investing in the industry 
expands, the preponderance of the DFI model has given 
way to some degree in favour of more commercial and 
institutional capital flows from a range of global investors. 
Sovereign wealth funds, pension funds, endowments, 
foundations and family offices that are now investing 
in private capital vehicles in Africa, with their interest driven by a combination of regulatory liberalization, 
improved structure and relatively high return potentials. 
Nonetheless, there remains room for further investment 
in the asset class, especially from African pension funds, 
whose rapid growth in assets under management and 
long-term investment horizons make them well suited 
to be a key funding source for private capital in Africa. 
A Contemporary View: Private Capital in Africa 
at Present
Africa’s private capital landscape underwent its most significant period of growth and 
metamorphosis between 1990 and 2010. This section of the report investigates the 
evolution of the ecosystem, profiling the changes in geographic, strategic, sector and 
asset foci of the industry’s founding fathers and earliest adopters. Finally, this section 
concludes with a deep dive into the profile of funds, fund types, and investment 
vehicles that can be found in Africa’s private capital industry at present. It begins with 
a discussion of both established and emerging fund structures employed by Africa-
focused fund managers, before mapping the emergence of and services provided 
by fund administrators that cater to this growing cohort of capital allocators.African pension 
funds, whose rapid 
growth in assets 
under management 
and long-term 
investment horizons 
make them well 
suited to be a key 
funding source for 
private capital in 
Africa. 
15
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaProfile of Funds in Africa7
Geographic Focus
Regional funds outside of Southern and North Africa 
begun to emerge from the mid-1990s. West African 
private capital funds first appeared when the likes 
of Cauris Management, African Capital Alliance and 
Mustard Capital Partners were established, while East 
Africa started receiving fund manager attention with 
the establishment of Fusion Capital and Kibo Capital 
Partners. From the early 2000s, some country-specific 
fund managers such as Venture Capital Botswana 
(2002), Pearl Capital Partners in Uganda (2006), 
Morocco’s Azur Innovation Management (2008) were 
established. Overall, most Africa-focused private capital 
funds continue to have a Sub-Saharan or regional 
geographic focus, while country-specific funds have 
also increased in volume in recent years. 
FIGURE 3:  Geographic Focus of Private 
Capital Funds in Africa, 2002-2022 H1
Pan-Africa Regional Country Speciﬁc
Sub-Saharan Africa22%4%
32%42%
21% 14%
33%32%2002-2011
2012-2022 H1Strategy Focus
With the exception of Ethos which had a dual private 
equity and private debt strategic focus, a majority of 
Africa’s earliest indigenous fund managers from 
the late 1980s to the early 1990s were principally 
focused on private equity. Given the specificity of the 
market and the nature of investable assets, African 
private equity was driven by growth capital strategies 
to finance the growth of established small and medium 
enterprises. Growth capital accounted for 60% of 
the forecast allocation of private equity fundraising 
between 1992 and 20128. Thereafter, more funds with 
either a combined growth and buyout or explicitly 
buyout strategic focus emerged, as African investors 
increasingly aligned their investment strategies with the 
strong demand for capital in the middle market.
The infrastructural demands of Africa’s growing 
population saw some fund managers evolving to plug 
the sector’s financing gap. From the early 2000s, 
a few fund managers began to include real estate 
and infrastructure into their investment strategies. 
Examples include private equity infrastructure fund 
manager African Infrastructure Investment Managers 
(2000), Actis (2004) whose strategic focus included 
real estate and infrastructure alongside private equity, 
and International Housing Solutions (2005), which was 
founded in South Africa and focused exclusively on real 
estate.
Venture capital has shown exceptional growth in recent 
years (discussed further in section two), with deal 
activity therein showing significant acceleration from 
2017 onwards. This is accompanied by the increasing 
number of new venture capital funds which closed 
on the continent in recent years to make investments 
in African early-stage companies as seen in Figure 4 
below. Furthermore, the tremendous growth of Africa’s 
venture ecosystem has not only attracted international 
investors and supported the development of domestic 
venture capital firms, it has also encouraged many 
Africa focused private equity firms to broaden their 
strategy to include a dedicated focus on venture capital. 
Prior to this, dealmaking in the early-stage ecosystem 
comprised of opportunistic investments from fund 
managers operating under a dual private equity and 
venture capital strategic focus. 
Only final closed funds that focus solely on Africa or have an allocation to Africa alongside a broader emerging markets 
investment mandate are included in this analysis. Funds with a global investment remit that invest in Africa are excluded.Source: AVCA
16
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaFIGURE 5:  Sector Focus of Private Capital 
Funds in Africa, 2002-2022 H1FIGURE 4:  Investment Stage Focus of Private 
Capital Funds in Africa, 2002-2022 H1
Unlike private capital funds in developed markets 
where private debt is a popular alternative investment 
asset, most private capital funds in Africa are equity 
funds which occasionally have a small portion of debt in 
their portfolio as a way to diversify assets. Nevertheless, 
private debt is a growing subset of the market. More 
private debt fund transactions are taking place in 
Africa’s private capital ecosystem, in addition to those 
led by development finance institutions and multilateral 
development banks, which have historically led the 
sector9. Although some mezzanine and pure debt 
structures can be found, there remains a need for more 
debt structures (namely senior and distressed debt) and 
greater geographical diversification of the asset class. 
Sector Focus
Private capital funds with a sector-specific investment 
focus have seen a remarkable growth in Africa in 
recent years as seen in Figure 5 below. The current Generalist Sector-Speciﬁc66%
54%34%
46%
2002-2011 2012-2022 H1Source: AVCApredisposition towards raising sector specific funds 
was not always the case in Africa’s private capital 
ecosystem, which in its infancy favoured multi or sector-
agnostic approaches. Although fund specialisation 
becomes apparent in the early years of the industry’s 
development, it only begins to corner the market 
from 2010 onwards. Illustratively, sector-specific funds 
accounted for 59% of private capital fundraising in 2021, 
up from a historical average of 52%10. This indicates 
that with the maturation of the African private capital 
industry, fund managers are increasingly adopting 
specialised investment strategies in sectors presenting 
significant commercial opportunity. This trend will 
likely persist in the long term as more emerging fund 
managers successfully deploy and exit their maiden 
funds and raise follow-on funds, in the process refining 
their investment strategies to make calculated, not 
sporadic, investments across key sectors of investor 
interest. Congruent to the specialisation of private 
capital funds has been the surge in venture capital fund 
managers coming to market, which disproportionately 
favour sector-specific investment approaches. 
Sector-specific fund managers in the late 1980s and 
early 1990s were primarily focused on Infrastructure, 
Agriculture (particularly primary agriculture projects) 
and Banking11. More recently, funds raised are now 
channelled towards Financial Services (including 
Fintech), Information Technology, Infrastructure 
(particularly projects within the Communication Services 
and Transport industries) and Renewable Energy, with 
increasing consideration being given towards climate-
resilient assets and sectors12.14%4%
14%
8%
3%53%
14%
4%
4%45%2002-2011
2012-2022 H1
Venture Capital Growth Capital Buyout
Replacement Infrastructure
Real Estate GeneralistPrivate Debt4%
6%10%1%16%
Source: AVCA
17
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaProfile of Fund Structures in Africa
Traditional Fund Structures
Most private capital fund managers in Africa are 
structured as partnership which entails a General 
Partner (GP) as the fund manager, and Limited Partners 
(LPs) as the fund’s investors. This fund structure 
allows the investors to avoid a double taxation, since 
partnerships are not taxed as entities, and taxes are 
administered at the individual investor level.
A Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) is another 
structure adopted by private capital firms in Africa. 
LLPs are hybrid structures, combining the characteristics 
of both a company and partnership. This structure 
is available in major jurisdictions in Africa including 
Mauritius, South Africa, Morocco, Ghana, Nigeria, and 
Rwanda.  
Some private capital firms and family offices in Africa 
are also structured as Bewind or Vested Trusts. Under 
this system, which is relatively uncommon outside of 
South Africa, the ownership of the underlying asset is 
vested with the beneficiaries while the trustee manages 
the investment on behalf of the beneficiaries. 
Finally, Master-Feeder funds are relatively common 
fund structures utilised by Africa-focused private 
capital fund managers. This approach sees a Feeder 
fund acting as a pooling vehicle for certain groups of 
investors, which then injects this capital into the Main 
or Master fund. Although often structured as limited 
partnerships, Master-Feeder fund structures can 
also make use of a combination of corporate entities 
including companies, limited partnerships and/or 
limited liability companies13. Master-Feeder funds are 
mostly used when groups of investors, depending 
on their respective jurisdictions, have specific tax or 
regulatory requirements that cannot be accommodated 
through a traditional single main Fund. In South Africa, 
Master-Feeder funds are used by investment managers 
for cross-border investment arrangements. Subject to 
the country’s exchange control and tax regulations, a 
feeder fund invests into a master fund that is invested 
offshore.
It is worth noting, however, that some fund managers 
of single country funds that are investing capital on 
behalf of both international and domestic investors 
are opting out of the Master-Feeder structure in favour 
of parallel funds. In Nigeria, an increasing cohort 
of private equity fund managers are raising Naira 
denominated parallel investment vehicles to attract 
capital commitments from local pension funds. This is 
because pension funds are no longer comfortable with 
dollar commitments to private equity funds, given the 
historical impact currency devaluation has had on the 
Naira value of their commitments; as well as the more recent difficulty in sourcing dollars to meet capital call 
obligations14. The first Nigerian private equity firm to 
raise a parallel vehicle was African Capital Alliance in 
2011, to accommodate commitments from non-closed 
pension fund administrators into their Capital Alliance 
Private Equity III.  
Emerging Fund Structures
Permanent Capital Vehicles (PCVs) are a new structure 
being adopted with increasing frequency by private 
capital firms. Although the structure is still yet to be 
popular in Africa, it offers a competitive advantage 
to jurisdictions providing it to investors. Unlike the 
partnership structure that involves raising funds within 
a short window (typically 12-18months), PCVs allows 
for several rounds of fundraising over an indefinite or 
unlimited time. In the same vein, PCVs enable private 
equity firms to benefit from the full growth period of 
the underlying investment by removing the pressure 
to exit at the culmination of the fund’s investment 
horizon. An example of a private equity firm structured 
as a PCV is TLG Capital, which launched the TLG Credit 
Opportunities Fund in 2016 and the TLG Africa Growth 
Impact Fund in 2021, both anchored by the firm’s 
permanent capital vehicle TLG Africa.  
In some cases, private capital firms may establish 
Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs). Primarily used to 
isolate financial risk, for project financing, or asset 
transfer, a SPV is a stand-alone legal entity or subsidiary 
with its own assets and liabilities. Usually, they are 
created to achieve the temporary goal of the sponsoring 
organisation. 
While they have historically oscillated in and out of 
favour by private investors globally, activity from 
Special Purpose Acquisition Companies (SPACs) in 
developed markets was particularly buoyant in 2020 
and 2021 and became an increasing topic of interest for 
private equity investors in emerging markets. SPACs are 
shell companies with no existing business operations, 
established as investment vehicles to raise capital from Most private equity 
fund managers in 
Africa are structured 
as partnership
18
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africainvestors based on the expertise and reputation of the 
manager. The first SPAC to list in Africa belonged to 
Capital Appreciation Group, which listed on the JSE in 
2015 and successfully completed its viable acquisition 
in 2017. Hulisani Limited also listed on the JSE in 2016 as 
a SPAC specialising in renewable energy investments, 
acquiring its first viable asset 11 months later thereby 
converting its listing as an investment entity15. In Africa, 
SPACs have also been used as an exit avenue, enabling 
private companies to raise capital during their transition 
to public market. An example is the Egyptian ride-
sharing startup Swvl, which listed on Nasdaq in March 
2022 through a merger with Queen’s Gambit Growth 
Capital, a U.S. women-led blank check company at a 
valuation of US$1.5 billion. 
Finally, while nascent, Protected Cell Companies 
(PCCs) have found a multitude of applications as an 
investment fund vehicle due to their versatility and 
unique legal structure. Also referred to as segregated 
portfolio companies, PCCs were established in 
Guernsey in 1997 and were originally conceived for use 
by family offices and (re)insurance companies16. They 
have since found their way into many jurisdictions and 
were first introduced in Africa in 1999 with the passing 
of the Protected Cell Company Act in Mauritius. More 
recently, the Law Governing Companies in Rwanda was 
amended and enacted in 2021 to accommodate PCCs, 
as part of a series of investment friendly restructuring 
of national legal and regulatory structures by the Kigali 
International Financial Centre. Cell companies have 
become increasingly popular fund vehicles favoured 
by close-ended private equity funds and funds-of-funds 
because of their capacity for legal segregation and inbuilt 
‘ring-fencing’ mechanisms17. Notably, this structure also 
lends itself to private capital investors looking to invest 
outside a fund structure, on a co-investment or ‘deal-by-deal’ basis. This is apt for Africa’s venture capital 
landscape at present, given that an increasing number 
of projects are being financed outside the traditional GP-
LP fund space. Instead, deal-by-deal activity has risen, 
as individual groups, family offices and corporations 
invest in mid to late-stage funding rounds with large 
ticket sizes. In this evolving context, protected cell 
companies can be used as vehicles to structure a series 
of distinct private equity, venture capital or real estate 
transactions, enabling direct investors on the continent 
to conduct due diligence on individual transactions 
without relying on a fund manager. The flexibility of 
the PCC structure also enables investors to opt in/out 
of individual deals based on their sector, geography 
and deal size preferences, and also vary their capital 
commitments on a deal-by-deal basis depending on 
their risk appetite or available dry powder at the time18. 
Profile of Fund Administrators in 
Africa
A major party that supports the work of private 
capital firms are third-party fund administrators. Fund 
administrators have a critical role to play to ease 
the legal and administrative processes associated 
with establishing private capital funds. Generally, 
most private capital firms - including Africa-focused 
fund managers - have limited in-house resources to 
carry out administrative and non-core operational 
functions. As such, this necessitates an outsourcing 
of these operations to fund administrators given 
the heavy administrative and reporting burdens of 
investor expectations. Fund administrators provide a 
host of necessary services, including facilitating fund 
expenses, providing asset custodial services, ensuring 
compliance with regulation, performing fund accounting 
and asset values calculations, providing capital call 
management, calculating waterfall and managing 
distribution to investors. By outsourcing these and other 
fund administration functions, fund managers then 
have increased capacity to focus on internal portfolio 
management. 
The majority of fund administrators servicing 
Africa (often alongside other regions) are primarily 
headquartered in offshore jurisdictions, chiefly 
concentrated in North America and Europe19. 
Examples of administration and custodial firms with a 
global service provider remit, but a robust presence or 
operation in Africa, include Trident Trust, Sanne Group 
and Apex Group. Fund administrators with a sole or 
predominant focus on service provision for African 
markets tend to be clustered in South Africa and 
Mauritius, which also host the continent’s oldest and 
well-established financial centres. Notable examples 
include Axis Fund Services, Adansonia Management Protected Cell 
Companies were 
established in 
Guernsey and 
originally conceived 
for use by family 
offices and (re)
insurance companies
19
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaServices, and BTG Trust and Corporate Services (all 
headquartered in Mauritius) as well as Curo Fund 
Services, Maitland Group, and Prescient Fund Services 
(all headquartered in South Africa). Onshore providers 
of fund and trusts services for Africa-focused private 
capital fund managers are emerging with increasing 
frequency outside these two financial poles, such as 
Zilla Capital (Egypt); Bora Capital Advisors (Ghana), and 
CPF Financial Services (Kenya).
With the rapid proliferation of Africa-focused private 
capital funds in recent years, African domiciled 
fund administrators are concurrently expanding to 
other markets on the continent to meet the rising 
demand for their services. An example is Axis, which 
is headquartered in Mauritius but later expanded to 
the Seychelles and South Africa. Another is DTOS, 
also headquartered in Mauritius but later expanded 
throughout East Africa (to Kenya and Uganda) and to 
the United Arab Emirates, recognising its increasing 
prominence as a gateway to invest in Africa. Similarly, 
some fund administrators in developed markets 
have expanded their operational reach to Africa. 
An example is Maitland Fund Services, which was 
founded in Luxembourg in 1976 but later opened 
another office in South Africa through the acquisition 
of Finsource in 2005. Additionally, given the speed 
with which established private capital firms in Africa 
are launching follow-on funds, and the increasing need 
for specialisation and customisation with these follow-
on funds, fund managers are increasingly seeking fund 
administration services at earlier stages of the fund 
lifecycle. It has become relatively commonplace for 
fund managers to engage the services of third-party 
fund managers while contemplating the early stages 
of their fund structure, rather than once the fund’s 
capital and investment priorities had already been 
established, which was previously standard practice20. 
Accordingly, fund administrators servicing the African 
market have expanded their service offering beyond 
traditional fund accounting and registrar activities to 
include fund structuring; registration and licensing; 
regulatory compliance and investor due diligence; and 
connecting fund managers with appropriate channel 
partners (such as counsel, auditors, tax accountants 
and placement agents).The maturation of Africa’s private capital ecosystem 
has also required fund administrators servicing the 
market to invest in technology-enabled solutions 
to meet the dynamic needs of fund managers and 
investors in the 21st century, that are adopting an 
increasingly sophisticated range of investment tools 
and strategies. Data and technology solutions are 
being harnessed with increasing frequency to improve 
the efficiency, accuracy, and competitive advantage in 
fund administration. An example is Curo Fund Services, 
a South African investment administration services 
provider, which joined Temenos Multifonds, a global 
accounting platform, in 2021. The Temenos platform 
is expected to simplify Curo’s architecture, enable 
automated processing and improve administrative 
efficiency21. The TMF Group, a multinational provider 
of critical administrative services, is another fund 
administrator that has deployed digital solution to 
improve client experience.With the rapid 
proliferation of 
Africa-focused 
private capital funds 
in recent years, 
African domiciled 
fund administrators 
are concurrently 
expanding to other 
markets on the 
continent to meet 
the rising demand 
for their services. 
20
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaOverview of 
Private Capital 
Activity In Africa2Evolution of Private Capital Activity in Africa
No stranger to crisis and volatility, Africa’s private 
capital industry has made significant achievements 
and continued to grow in adverse conditions, 
demonstrating remarkable resilience to exogenous 
shocks. Neither the 2007-2008 global financial crisis 
nor the unprecedented Covid-19 pandemic overturned 
the high growth trajectory of investment activity on 
the continent. However, while the industry can, and 
has, shown itself capable of overcoming uncertainty 
and withstanding macroeconomic crises, several 
reasons contributed to its tenacity. Specifically, in the 
aftermath of the global financial crisis, several major 
institutional players increasingly turned their attention 
to Africa and other emerging markets to achieve levels 
of growth that were not possible to attain elsewhere22. 
Additionally, the strong investment activity during the Covid-19 pandemic was driven by deals in technology-
enabled companies leveraging digital innovation to 
provide access to much needed goods and services, 
whose immediate accessibility was interrupted with 
the introduction of containment measures by national 
authorities. The industry’s ability to navigate periods of 
both continental and global macroeconomic turbulence 
is also down to the hands-on engagement of Africa-
focused fund managers, who have long prioritised not 
only financial support for their portfolios but also having 
a transformative impact in terms of value creation. As 
a result, the volume of private capital deals in Africa, 
which has maintained an upward trend over the last 
20 years, reached a peak of 429 investments in 2021 
driven primarily by venture capital investments in early-
stage companies. 
Key Trends
Private capital in Africa has 
come a long way since the 
emergence of the first wave of 
fund managers in South Africa 
over two decades ago. While to 
date it only represents a small 
share of global investment 
activity, the metamorphosis 
of Africa’s private capital 
landscape has not only 
encouraged the development 
of home-grown fund managers, 
the impressive growth of the 
industry in recent years has 
also attracted investors from  
all over the world to the 
continent’s shores.
22
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaFIGURE 1: Total Volume of Private Capital Deals in Africa, By Year
FIGURE 2: Total Value of Private Capital Deals in Africa, By Year, US$bn2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 20102011 20122013201420152016201720182019202020212022
H115178
130
97 104116113
89
495041186
158189 181200205233258429
338
Global
Financial
CrisisCovid-19
pandemic
2002 2003200420052006200720082009 20102011 20122013201420152016201720182019202020212022
H10.24.1
2.77.8
4.1
2.32.02.6
1.53.99.3
2.0
0.71.1
0.54.77.4
3.44.1
3.64.8Source: AVCA
Source: AVCA
2022 H1 refers to the first half of 2022
23
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaStrategy Focus 
Until recently, private capital in Africa developed 
in tandem with the private equity industry, which 
absorbed the vast majority of investments in the 
ecosystem (see Figure 3). Private equity investments in 
Africa were chiefly in the form of growth capital given 
the nascency of the industry alongside the continent’s 
demographic trajectory, which jointly encouraged 
investors to adopt strategies that focused on the 
sustainable expansion of their portfolio companies. 
Overall, private equity investments have attracted over 
half (54%) of all investments recorded on the continent 
since 2002. However, these investments have recently 
experienced a notable drop in their share of total deal 
volume, influenced by the exponential growth of Africa’s 
venture capital industry. The tremendous growth of 
venture capital investment activity, which timidly 
started at the beginning of the previous decade, 
reached its peak in 2021 with a total of 319 early-
stage deals being reported (see Figure 3). The rising 
tide of venture capital in Africa continued in the first 
half of 2022, which saw a total of 445 venture capital investments take place on the continent. Notably, the 
expansion of Africa’s venture ecosystem, particularly in 
the last two years, has served as a buffer or insulation 
layer for the entire private capital ecosystem, leading its 
growth during times of global uncertainty and extreme 
macroeconomic headwinds. Illustratively, since 2021 
large venture capital investments accounted for 75% 
(equivalent to US$6.7bn) of the total private capital deal 
value reported between 2021 to 2022 H1.
Furthermore, the evolution of the industry brought 
additional financing instruments to the forefront. 
The relative illiquidity of African stock exchanges along 
with the risk-averse tendencies of many African banks 
and financial institutions have historically presented 
significant challenges for businesses seeking funding. 
Private sector financing instruments evolved to fill this 
gap, and over time private debt has emerged as a key 
component of the industry with an increasing number 
of investors raising private debt funds.
FIGURE 3: Total Volume of Private Capital Deals Reported in Africa, By Year & Asset Class
Prior to 2014, large private equity investments were 
the main contributor to total annual investment values. 
However, this trend started differentiating in 2014 
when Africa’s private capital industry experienced 
the first wave of substantially large investments 
in infrastructure related projects, which were 
associated with the expansion of telecoms towers 
and the development of energy generation projects 
across the continent. Although the establishment of an increasing number of funds focused exclusively on 
infrastructure have strengthened this trend towards 
large infrastructure investments, their share of total 
annual deal values has seen notable fluctuations. These 
variations have historically resulted from the relatively 
limited number of infrastructure focused funds available 
on the continent, and the unpredictability that comes 
along with the time when, and the size at, infrastructure 
projects will finally reach their financial close. 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 20102011 20122013201420152016201720182019202020212022
H1
Venture Capital Private Equity Infrastructure Private Debt Real Estate
Source: AVCA
24
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaFIGURE 4: Total Value of Private Capital Deals in Africa, By Year & Asset Class
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 20102011 2012201320142015201620172018201920202021
Venture Capital Private Equity Infrastructure Private Debt Real Estate2022
H1
Africa’s private capital industry has been focused 
on supporting small and medium sized enterprises 
which constitute the backbone of Africa’s economy 
and account for approximately 90% of all companies23. 
Accordingly, the majority (61%) of all private capital 
investments in Africa from 2002 to 2022 H1 were 
below US$10mn in size. Although this has always been the dominant trend, the increasing number of venture 
capital investments taking place in recent years has 
further reinforced the prevalence of deals sized below 
US$10mn. This is due to the smaller investment sizes 
that start-ups often attract, especially in the early stage 
of their development. 
FIGURE 5: Total Volume of Private Capital Deals Reported in Africa, by Ticket Sizes, By Year
2002 2003200420052006200720082009 20102011 2012201320142015201620172018201920202021
<US$10mn US$10-49mn US$50-99mn US$100-250mn US$250mn+2022
H1Source: AVCA
Source: AVCA
25
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaSector Focus
Private capital fund managers have been investing 
across a broad range of industries in Africa, financing 
companies and consequently sectors that are not 
captured by African capital markets. The latter tend to be 
dominated by companies in mining, natural resources, 
and financial sectors and as such do not fully reflect the 
range of industries that contribute to consumer-driven 
economic growth24. 
New sectors have increased in popularity through 
the years driven by certain economic, social, and 
technological developments such as the rise of the 
African consumer; the transition to a low carbon 
economy; and technology’s role in driving economic 
development. That said, Financials – a sector deeply 
associated with middle-class consumers in Africa 
– has dominated deal volume across the entire 
period. Although investments in Financials have been 
the dominant trend, there is a remarkable change in 
the nature of the companies that private capital fund 
managers support. While historically investors targeted 
traditional banking service providers and insurance 
companies, current trends show that investments in 
financial technology are driving the continued growth 
of the sector. Information Technology has also been 
subject to increasing investor interest and deal flow, 
driven by the transformative role of technology and 
digitalisation in boosting the efficiency and productive 
capacity of many other industries, with Financials 
serving as a case in point. 
Other sectors that have experienced an increase in 
the decade between 2012 -2022 H1 are the Consumer 
Discretionary and Healthcare sectors. Although the 
growth of both sectors are also related to rise of the African consumer with growing purchasing power, they 
also owe their rising popularity to a number of different 
growth determinants. The Consumer Discretionary 
sector has benefited from investments in e-commerce 
and online consumer services providers, which have 
facilitated increased accessibility and thus consumption 
of goods and services across the region. On the other 
hand, the Covid-19 pandemic was a pivotal growth driver 
for Healthcare. While the Healthcare sector showed 
steady annual growth prior to the onset of Covid-19, it 
set the stage for increased private-public investment 
and co-operation given Africa’s already weak and 
overburdened healthcare systems. At the height of the 
pandemic, private capital investors pivoted to capitalise 
on emerging opportunities in defensive sectors, 
providing the critical infrastructure, pharmaceutical, and 
supplies that in some cases governments could not.
Finally, the Utilities sector has also experienced an 
increase in both private capital deal volume and value. 
Investments in renewable energy projects, coupled with 
the proliferation of new opportunities for private capital 
fund managers to fill the continent’s electrification gap 
and enable its transition to a low carbon future, are 
some of the driving forces behind the rise of Utilities. 
Between 2012 and 2022 H1, Utilities attracted the 
largest share of private capital investments by value, 
owing to the capital intensity of renewable energy 
projects which often require substantial investment for 
their development and operations. Although Utilities 
represented just 2% of the total deal value in 2002-2011, 
the sector’s increase in share of deals to 19% in 2012-
2022 H1 indicates the changing agendas and priorities 
of investors operating on the continent. 
Financials – a 
sector deeply 
associated with 
middle-class 
consumers in 
Africa – has 
dominated deal 
volume across the 
entire period. 
26
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaFIGURE 6: Share of Private Capital Deal Volume in Africa, By Sector and Year Groups
FIGURE 7:  Share of Private Capital Deal Value in Africa, By Sector and Year Groups2002-2011 2012-2022 H1Financials
Consumer Discretionary
Industrials
Consumer Staples
Information Technology
Health Care
Utilities
Communication Services
Real Estate
Materials
Energy20%16%
14%10%
13%14%
11%13%
10%6%
8%6%
7%4%
10%
6%
5%6%
4%14%
2%3%
2002-2011 2012-2022 H1Utilities
Financials
Communication Services
Industrials
Energy
Consumer Staples
Consumer Discretionary
Health Care
Materials
Information Technology
Real Estate19%2%
18%14%
17%16%
11%13%
8%7%
6%3%
6%22%
3%
5%
4%17%
3%0%
3%3%Source: AVCA
Source: AVCA
27
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaGrowth Drivers of Private Capital in Africa 
Africa has boasted promising prospects for 
investors looking to capitalise on the continent’s 
long-term growth fundamentals
Over the last two decades, Africa has boasted promising 
prospects for investors looking to capitalise on the 
continent’s long-term growth fundamentals. What was 
once described as the ‘’hopeless continent’’25 at the 
turn of the century has since made significant progress 
across a wide spectrum of economic, political, and social 
indicators to become one of the last frontiers in the global 
economy. Although each of the continent’s 54 countries 
has had a unique developmental path and economic 
trajectory, a host of economic and social reforms initiated 
by various African governments through the years has 
set the stage for robust continental growth and the 
elimination of many traditional market entry barriers. The 
growth of private capital investment in Africa reflects 
the changing nature and scope of external flows to sub-
Saharan Africa, where foreign direct investment (FDI) 
has come to eclipse official development assistance 
(ODA)26. 17 African countries recorded receiving more 
FDI that ODA in 2012, climbing to 26 countries in 2017 as 
investment activity on the continent continued to rise27. 
According to the UNCTAD’s  World Investment Report 
2022, foreign direct investment to African countries hit 
a record of US$83bn in 2021. It is indisputable that the 
continent’s growth narrative has been turning the heads 
of both international and local investors who have been 
proved extremely keen on harnessing the continent’s 
potential. 
What has been driving the high growth trajectory of 
Africa’s private capital industry? Firstly, the targeted 
efforts of African governments in the early 2000s to 
restore political stability, improve macroeconomic 
conditions, and undertake microeconomic reforms28. Specifically, government action to end armed conflict 
and institute democratic reforms along with the 
implementation of market-oriented adjustments and 
microeconomic policies laid the foundations for the 
“Africa Rising” narrative to form. These structural 
adjustments aimed at reducing domestic inflation rates, 
decreasing exposure to foreign debt, cutting budget 
deficits, liberalising industries and lowering corporate 
taxes, thus creating the conditions for private capital 
to flourish. 
Secondly, the continent’s relatively strong economic 
performance coupled with its resilience to global 
economic headwinds. Many African economies 
were expanding at a record pace before the Covid-19 
pandemic. For example, Ethiopia and Rwanda recorded 
some of the fastest growth in the world with an average 
of more than 7.5% per year over the past two decades29. 
Senegal has also experienced a strong growth with its 
economy expanding by more than 6% per year between 
2014 and 201830, and the country’s economy is projected 
to grow the most in Sub-Saharan Africa at a rate of 8.1% 
in 202331. In addition to this strong economic growth, 
Africa has been notably resilient to external shocks (see 
Figure 8). During the period of the Great Recession (2007 
-2009), Africa managed to maintain above-average GDP 
growth of 5.2% in 2008 and 3.1% in 2009. Even the 
Covid-19 pandemic, which caused an unparalleled shock 
to the global economy, did not significantly overturn the 
continent’s growth trajectory. While Africa’s economic 
growth saw modest contractions, these were to a lesser 
degree that the contractions witnessed in emerging and 
developed markets. 
28
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaFIGURE 8: Annual percent change of real GDP Growth 
-6-4-20246810
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 20102011 20122013201420152016201720182019202020212022
Africa Advanced economies Emerging markets & developing economiesGlobal
Financial
CrisisCovid-19
pandemic
Thirdly, Africa’s strong demographic dividend is not 
only a tremendous opportunity for the continent to 
significantly develop its socioeconomic welfare, but it 
also presents a unique prospect for investors. Africa’s 
population has more than doubled since the turn of the 
century, creating an infrastructure gap that is largely 
insurmountable for local governments to bridge alone. 
Private capital funds have been disbursed to bridge this 
infrastructure financing gap, concurrently benefiting 
from the consumer middle class that has emerged 
from Africa’s exponential population growth, which is 
projected to reach 1.7 billion consumers by 2030. As 
it stands, the continent already provides access to a 1.2-billion-person consumer-oriented market. Rising 
income levels along with an increasing demand for 
goods and services has created a strong consumer 
class in Africa. Given this already significant and rapidly 
expanding consumer base, lucrative opportunities for 
investment, production, and delivery are emerging 
on the continent. The demographic dividend extends 
beyond consumerism - as the proportion of skilled 
labour increases and educational attainment improves 
across the continent, the result is a surge of human 
capital needed to further power Africa’s growing 
businesses and industrial development.Source: IMF
29
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaFinally,  the African Continental Free Trade Area 
Agreement (AfCFTA), which came into force in January 
2021 to establish the largest free-trade area in the 
world, is a strong signal to investors wishing to make 
the most of an integrated Africa open for domestic 
and foreign investment. The AfCFTA consolidates a market of about $1.3 billion with a combined GDP 
of $3.4 trillion32, and its successful implementation 
enables more regional integration, the development of 
competitive and resilient regional value chains in African 
industries, and will significantly raise the continent’s 
share of global trade.
Regional Spotlights
FIGURE 1:  Volume and value of private capital deals reported in Africa, by region,  
2002 – 2022 H1
North Africa
576 deals | US$13bn
East Africa
568 deals | 
US$6.1bn
Southern Africa
1012 deals | US$19.7bnCentral Africa
102 deals | US$2.4bn
HQ location outside Africa 
-operations in multiple 
African regions
169 deals | US$11.9bnWest Africa
932 deals | 
US$19.8bn
Source: AVCA
30
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaEastern Africa
Private capital investment activity in East Africa has been 
on an upward trajectory since 2002. The diverging scale 
of opportunities available in the region has increasingly 
attracted the attention of investors based in Africa and 
beyond. Private capital investment activity has been 
steadily rising in the region from a historically low 
threshold, growing at a CAGR of 9% over the last ten 
years. In its infancy, private capital investment activity 
in East Africa was primarily driven by Pan-African, Sub-
Saharan and Regional private equity funds targeting 
SMEs that had the potential for strong regional market 
expansion. However, in the last six years venture 
capital deal making has led dealmaking in the region, 
accounting for 60% of all the investments reported 
therein. East Africa’s venture capital landscape has 
gradually matured in recent years, evidenced by the 
growing specialisation amongst both investors and 
start-ups and the increasing separation between impact 
and venture funds33. In the past, investing in early-stage 
companies within the region was largely synonymous 
with impact investing, but the two have been uncoupled 
alongside changing narratives around the nature and 
scope of impact investing. 
The value of private capital investments reported in 
East Africa has notably increased since 2002. While a 
handful of large investments have caused fluctuations in 
annual deal values, the median deal size has remained 
at US$4mn - driven by private equity and venture capital 
deals sized below US$10mn. 2002 - 2008 2009 - 2015 2016 - 2022 H1
Deal Volume
Top Asset Class
Most Active 
Country
Most Active SectorDeal Value
Average Deal Size55
Private Equity
Kenya
Financials Financials Consumer StaplesUS$0.6bn
US$22mn180
Private Equity
KenyaUS$1.9bn
US$15mn333
Venture Capital
KenyaUS$3.6bn
US$15mn
Private capital 
investment activity 
in East Africa 
has been on an 
upward trajectory 
since 2002. 
31
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africa0100200300400500600
2002-2008 2009-2015 2016-2022 H1
Value of Deals, US$bn Volume of Deals 0246810
0.63.6333
180
551.9
Driven by a surge 
of investments in 
FinTech companies 
between 2021 and 
2022 H1, Financials 
has recently bounced 
back to become  
the most active 
sector by volume  
in East Africa.FIGURE 2: Total Volume and Value of Private Capital Deals Reported in East Africa,  
2002-2022 H1 
The aftermath of the global financial crisis had an 
adverse impact on the Financial sector’s share of deal 
volume within East Africa. Additionally, Kenya’s mini 
banking crisis in 2016, when one of the nation’s largest 
banks was unable to meet its financial obligations, 
further deteriorated investment activity within the sector. 
However, driven by a surge of investments in FinTech 
companies between 2021 and 2022 H1, Financials 
has recently bounced back to become the most active 
sector by volume in East Africa. The success of financial 
technology in East Africa, which has encouraged 
foreign and local investment in recent years, can largely 
be attributed to successful partnerships among value 
chain players, which have mainly been centred around 
telco/wallets34. 
The Consumer Discretionary sector has also been 
the recipient of increasing deal activity, supported by 
venture capital investments in companies providing 
consumer services and e-commerce. On the other hand, 
investments in the Real Estate sector have experienced 
the hardest hit through the years. This was due to Real 
Estate focused funds which initially targeted the region 
(mainly from 2011 onwards), that did not go on to raise 
second generation funds. Source: AVCA
32
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaFinancials
Information Technology Communication Services Energy Materials Real EstateConsumer Discretionary Industrials Consumer Staples Utilities Health Care2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2022 H1 2021 202001020304050607080FIGURE 3: Total Volume of Private Capital Deals Reported in East Africa, by Sector,  
2012 – 2022 H1
Kenya, East Africa’s largest economy with a GDP of 
US$110.3bn and a growth rate of 7.5% in 202135, has 
been the largest market for private capital investment 
in the region. The country’s regulatory framework, 
ease of doing business, the openness of its economy 
along with its high competitiveness due to the quality 
of human capital, research, and innovation have 
positioned Kenya as a lucrative investment market both 
regionally and continentally. Private capital investment 
activity has grown impressively in Kenya (from just 27 
deals in 2002-2008 to 192 deals in 2016-2022 H1), and 
as such the country has cemented itself as the region’s 
leading investment destination. Given the country’s 
leading position within the East Africa Community (EAC) 
which provides investors access to a wider consumer 
market of up to 400 million people36, investors have 
historically used the country as a launchpad to expand 
their Kenyan investments into other parts of the region 
and consequently increase their regional footprint. 
Additionally, other countries within the region – such 
as Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda, and Ethiopia – have 
also been on the radar of investors. At the forefront of 
the privatisation trend in Africa, Uganda is the second largest market by investment volume in East Africa 
driven by investments in Consumer Staples, Financials, 
and Healthcare. Moreover, the country’s electricity 
generation industry, which was unbundled two decades 
ago, has been an enabler of significant investment by 
major African and international investors in Uganda’s 
Utilities sector. 
Rwanda has enjoyed strong economic growth over 
the last years, averaging 6.5% a year in the decade 
leading up to 2021. This has been accompanied by 
substantial improvements in living standards, access 
to services and human development indicators, 
while poverty has also declined37. Aggregate private 
capital deal volume channelled to Rwanda has also 
increased, centring around deals in early stage and 
growth stage businesses. The decisiveness exhibited 
by the Rwandese government to enable private sector 
growth  by positioning itself as an investment hub will 
enable the achievement of the country’s long-term 
developmental goals and facilitate a shift away from its 
public-sector led development model which has shown 
its limitations.Source: AVCA
33
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaFinally, Ethiopia has been among the fastest growing 
economies in the world. Averaging real GDP growth 
of 9.5% per year over the last 15 years, Ethiopia also 
constitutes the second most populous country in Africa. Riding on the preceding macroeconomic growth 
fundamentals, private capital investors began to invest 
more earnestly in Ethiopia in the early to mid-2010s. 
FIGURE 4: Total Volume of Private Capital Deals in East Africa for the Top 5 Most Active 
Countries, 2002-2022 H1
2002-2008 2009-2015 2016-2022 H1
Rwanda115 15Uganda311149
Tanzania209 22Kenya100
27192Ethiopia1118
Growth drivers fuelling private capital 
investment in East Africa
Although private capital dynamics are very country 
specific, growth determinants which can be applied 
to most East African countries have fuelled private 
capital activity across the region. Firstly, most East 
African countries have been engaged in privatisation 
programs for more than two decades now. For example, 
the privatisation programme of the Government of 
Rwanda - dated March 1996 - recognised the private 
sector as the engine of growth, and established 
privatisation as one of the key elements in the Government’s economic reform and reconstruction 
efforts. In Kenya, a committee was formed in 1991 to 
implement the privatisation process, while in Uganda 
the Public Enterprise Reform and Divestiture Statute 
was enacted in 1993 to promote the role of the private 
sector38. These reforms undoubtedly paved the way for 
both local and foreign investment into the region in the 
1990s and continue to be powerful signals to potential 
investors. For example, in September 2022 Ethiopia 
passed a landmark decision to open its banking sector to 
foreign investors as part of the government’s economic 
reform39.   Secondly, East Africa fully represents the 
narrative of ‘’Africa rising’’. The region has been the 
continent’s fastest-growing region in recent years since Source: AVCA
34
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africait is home to several of the fastest-growing economies, 
including Ethiopia, Djibouti, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, 
and Uganda40.  Thirdly, the size of the middle class 
in East Africa has been growing. In 2020, Tanzania 
became the latest country in the region to graduate 
from low-income to middle-income status, joining three 
of its neighbours in the World Bank’s lower middle-
income category41. Fourthly, there is an increasing 
urbanisation in cities across the region which results 
in growth in related industries such as housing, retailing and general consumption. Furthermore, the increasing 
level of integration among the countries of the East 
Africa Community has encouraged the establishment of 
a persuasive investment thesis for the region. The East 
African Community has facilitated intra-regional trade, 
cross-border investments and provides investors with 
access to a market of 146 million consumers42. Individual 
markets in East Africa are small in global context, but as 
a single community and market the region becomes an 
attractive investment destination. 
An increasing urbanisation in cities across the 
region results in growth in related industries such 
as housing, retailing and general consumption.
Western Africa
2002 - 2008 2009 - 2015 2016 - 2022 H1
Deal Volume
Top Asset Class
Most Active 
Country
Most Active SectorDeal Value
Average Deal Size111
Private Equity
Nigeria
Financials Financials FinancialsUS$2.3bn
US$28mn238
Private Equity
NigeriaUS$9.3bn
US$44mn538
Venture Capital
NigeriaUS$8.1bn
US$20mn
35
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaWest Africa is widely seen as a robust market for 
private capital investments in Africa. The region has 
seen tremendous growth in both the volume and value 
of investments recorded through the years, attracting 
an increasing share of overall African private capital 
activity. Although historically the region’s share of deal 
volume was the second largest after Southern Africa, West Africa’s investment activity exceeded Southern 
Africa with a total of 538 deals being reported over 
the last six years. The increase in deal execution was 
due to the number of venture capital investments 
grew exponentially to a high of 57%, having only 
accounted for 9% of the total number of deals that 
took place between 2009 and 2015. This growth has 
been largely driven by Nigeria which has evolved into 
one of the continent’s most vibrant start-up investment 
hotspots, accounting for the largest part of early-stage 
deal activity in Africa (by country) between 2021 and 
2022 H143. 
Large venture capital investments in financial 
technology companies headquartered in the region 
have significantly contributed to the substantial capital 
inflow that West Africa has seen recently. Furthermore, 
large investments predominantly in infrastructure that 
have been directed to West African companies have 
also contributed to the significant capital that the region 
has attracted through the years. West Africa is widely 
seen as a robust 
market for private 
capital investments 
in Africa. 
0100200300400500600
2002-2008 2009-2015 2016-2022 H1
Value of Deals, US$bn Volume of Deals 0246810
2.38.1538
283
1119.3FIGURE 5: Total volume and value of private capital deals reported in West Africa, 2002-
2022H1
Source: AVCA
Financials dominate West Africa’s private capital 
landscape. Within the financial sector, investment 
activity initially targeted traditional banking 
institutions. However, FinTech proved to be a game 
changer and a very strong driver for the region’s 
future growth. The significant increase in the number of mobile subscribers in West Africa and the tremendous 
potential for digital businesses providing financial 
services was a factor that determined the direction of 
investment activity in recent years. A significant majority 
of deals (75%) in West Africa’s financial sector from 2016 
to 2022H1 were in financial technology companies. 
36
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaInvestment activity in West Africa has traditionally 
been focused in sectors that address the basic needs 
and services of the region’s growing population. 
Consequently, the Consumer Discretionary, Industrials, 
Healthcare and Consumer Staples sectors have drawn 
the bulk of investor attention in the region. For example, the currency depreciation of some of West Africa’s local 
currencies (e.g., Nigerian Naira) constituted a growth 
driver for some industries such as consumer goods and 
agribusiness as there was a significant demand for local 
products that could substitute exports. 
FIGURE 6:  Total volume of private capital deals reported in West Africa, by sector,  
2012 – 2022 H1
Financials Information Technology
Communication Services Energy Materials Real EstateConsumer Discretionary Industrials Consumer Staples
Utilities Health Care2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2022 H1 2021 20200306090120150
Africa’s largest economy, Nigeria, has historically 
dominated West Africa’s private capital activity, and 
has shaped investment trends in the region. The sheer 
size of its economy and population has positioned 
Nigeria as a key market for private capital investors 
located in Africa and beyond. Although the country 
has experienced significant volatility through the years 
partly due its high dependence on commodities, the 
number of deals executed in the country have been on 
an upward trend reaching a record high of investments 
in 2021 which was driven by early-stage deals mainly 
in FinTech companies. In the rest of Anglophone West 
Africa, Ghana has historically accounted for the 
second largest share of investments. Africa’s largest 
economy, Nigeria, 
has historically 
dominated West 
Africa’s private 
capital activity.Source: AVCA
37
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaFIGURE 7: Total volume of private capital deals in West Africa for the top 5 most active 
countries, 2002-2022 H1
2002-2008 2009-2015 2016-2022 H1Côte d'Ivoire221338Senegal121033
Nigeria124
53318
Ghana64
1378Mali75 13Outside of these two key markets, a broad range 
of countries – predominantly within Francophone 
West Africa – have also attracted investors interest. 
Specifically, Côte d’Ivoire and Senegal have been 
the dominant markets for private capital investment 
among the francophone countries of West Africa. The similar business culture across Francophone 
West Africa; its Euro-linked common currency; and 
the growing harmonisation of the legal and regulatory 
landscape in the region due to OHADA have made a 
strong investment case for the region.
Growth drivers fuelling private capital 
investment in West Africa
Although West Africa consists of private capital markets 
with different levels of maturity, universally applicable 
growth drivers have led private capital activity in the 
region and will continue playing an important role in the 
future. The region’s sizeable population has created 
a tremendous opportunity for investors wishing 
to capitalise on the region’s large consumer base. 
Specifically, West Africa has a population of 426 million 
people which is equivalent to 5.16% of the world’s 
population. This coupled with the region’s increasing middle class with higher spending power, youthful 
population, and relatively low penetration rates 
across a variety of industries creates an attractive 
investment environment for both local and international 
investors. Furthermore, West Africa is rich in natural 
resources, which makes the region a key partner for 
the western world and other emerging economies. This 
has created investment opportunities in businesses 
providing services to relevant industries. Moreover, 
the increasing level of harmonisation of business law 
among the member states of OHADA has promoted 
a unified legal and regulatory framework making 
Francophone West Africa viewed as a homogenous Source: AVCA
38
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africaand investment-friendly group. In addition to efforts 
resulting from the regional integration of different states, 
individual countries have also undertaken reforms to 
spur investor interest. For example, in December 2019 
Senegal became the second African country to pass a 
Startup Act which aims to create a better environment 
for innovation and entrepreneurship by providing 
tax-breaks and reducing the legal complexities of 
business regulation for SMEs44. Finally, the deepening of integration among the member states of the 
Economic Community of West African States - which 
among others aim to address a range of investment 
policy and investment climate issues that constitute 
barriers for private investment across the region - is 
also a strong signal to investors. The vision of a 
monetary and currency union among the 15 ECOWAS 
member states will inevitably stimulate cross-regional 
and foreign investment. 
The region’s sizeable population coupled with 
the increasing middle class with higher spending 
power, youthful population, and relatively low 
penetration rates across a variety of industries 
creates an attractive investment environment for 
both local and international investors.
Southern Africa
2002 - 2008 2009 - 2015 2016 - 2022 H1
Deal Volume
Top Asset Class
Most Active 
Country
Most Active SectorDeal Value
Average Deal Size177
Private Equity
South Africa
Industrials Financials Consumer StaplesUS$8.9bn
US$109mn352
Private Equity
South AfricaUS$4.8bn
US$29mn483
Private Equity
South AfricaUS$5.9bn
US$19mn
39
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaSouthern Africa 
consists of two 
distinct private 
capital markets: 
South Africa, and 
the remainder of 
the SADC region 
which is one of the 
most nascent. 
Southern Africa consists of two distinct private capital 
markets: South Africa, which has been the most mature 
market for private capital on the continent, and the 
remainder of the SADC region which is one of the most nascent. Consequently, the evolution of the private 
capital industry in the region should be approached 
from two different perspectives. 
South Africa has been leading private capital 
investment activity in Southern Africa, and therefore 
developments within the country have played a 
significant role in determining the evolution of the 
private capital industry in the region. From 2002 to 
2015, Southern Africa accounted for the largest share 
of private capital deals in Africa by volume. However, 
this changed in 2016-2022H1 with West Africa taking 
the lead in investment volume. 
Large investments in South Africa such as the Actis-led 
investments in Alexander Forbes (U$1.2bn in 2007) and 
Actom (US$0.7bn in 2008) have significantly affected 
year on year deal values and contributed to the high 
value of capital directed into the region from 2002 
to 2008. Although the value of deals in the region 
experienced a notable drop in 2009-2015 driven by 
the scarce number of deals above US$250mn in South 
Africa, total deal value has recovered recently driven 
by investments in Materials, Financials, Industrials, 
Communication Services and Utilities. 
FIGURE 8: Total volume and value of private capital deals reported in Southern Africa,  
2002-2022 H1
0100200300400500600
2002-2008 2009-2015 2016-2022 H1
Value of Deals, US$bn Volume of Deals 0246810
8.9
5.9483
352
177
4.8
Source: AVCA
40
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaFinancials have emerged as the most active sector 
for private capital investments in Southern Africa 
accounting for 22% of private capital investments 
from 2019 to 2022H1. As in other regions of Africa, the 
growth of the sector has been driven by venture capital 
investments in financial technology companies. Although 
South Africa is home to one of the most developed 
banking and financial sectors on the continent, the 
sector only recently started accounted for largest 
share of investments. That said, other sectors such 
as Industrials, Consumer Discretionary, Consumer 
Staples and Real Estate which are associated with 
South Africa’s strong manufacturing base, middle 
income consumers and rapid urbanisation have been 
leading by investment volume. Financials have 
emerged as the 
most active sector 
for private capital 
investments in 
Southern Africa.
FIGURE 9: Total volume of private capital deals reported in Southern Africa, by Sector, 2012 
– 2022 H1 
Financials Information Technology
Communication Services Energy Materials Real EstateConsumer Discretionary Industrials Consumer Staples
Utilities Health Care2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2022 H1 2021 2020020406080100
Source: AVCA
South Africa remains the most significant market 
for private capital investment in Southern Africa 
despite its decreasing share of private capital deal 
volume in the region. Specifically, the country’s share 
of investments which dropped to 67% in 2016-2022 H1 from 77% in 2002-2008 was due to a combination of 
factors. First, challenges associated with local currency 
devaluation and low commodity prices which resulted 
in slower economic growth had an adverse impact 
on investments in the short term. Second, the spread 
41
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africaof private capital investments in other countries such 
as Zambia, Namibia, Mauritius, and Madagascar have 
slightly decreased the dominance of South Africa in 
deal volume. 
Outside of South Africa, Zambia attracted the second 
largest share of deal volume from 2002 to 2022 H1. 
Investment opportunities within the country have been 
targeted by mainly Southern Africa-based fund managers, 
a few local funds and opportunistically by Pan-African 
funds. Despite a relatively challenging environment for 
fund managers operating in the country, the largest 
reported private capital deal that the country has seen 
to date was the US$97mn investment by the Australia-
based private equity firm EMR Capital which acquired an 80% interest in Zambia’s Lubambe copper mine for 
US$97.1mn. 
Mauritius also increased its share of deal volume 
within Southern Africa through the years. The 
country’s dynamic and established financial ecosystem 
has attracted investments largely in businesses that 
are headquartered in the country but have a regional 
or multi-regional footprint. Finally, private capital in 
Madagascar and Mozambique has also been active 
but remains nascent. Although Madagascar has 
attracted mainly investment from local impact funds and 
Southern Africa based fund managers, Mozambique 
has also seen investments from funds with a pan-African 
geographic remit. 
FIGURE 10: Total volume of private capital deals in Southern Africa for the top 5 most active 
countries, 2002-2022 H1
South Africa252
137325Mozambique7219Zambia23330
Madagascar156 18
Mauritius13627
2002-2008 2009-2015 2016-2022 H1
Source: AVCA
Growth drivers fuelling private capital 
investment in Southern Africa
In Southern Africa, private capital activity is 
predominantly concentrated in South Africa meaning that trends within the country have influenced the 
overall trajectory and growth drivers of the private 
capital industry in the region. Southern Africa is home 
to the continent’s second largest economy, South 
Africa, which constitutes the most developed of sub-
Saharan economies, with its deepest capital markets 
42
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africaand understanding of the continent since it is the fifth-
largest source for FDI45. The country has also recently 
ranked first in the Absa Africa Financial Markets Index for 
2022, which evaluates countries’ financial development 
based on measures of market accessibility, openness, 
and transparency46. Historically, the country’s advanced 
economy has not only attracted investors into the 
region, but most importantly initiated the development 
of the whole industry in the continent. 
Outside of the continent’s financial hub, South Africa, 
developments in other countries within the region have 
also favoured the development of the private capital 
industry. For example, Zambia’s good governance, 
sound macroeconomic policies, GDP growth rate at 4.1% in 202147, political stability have created a dynamic 
environment for private capital which is however at 
its infancy. Furthermore, the Mauritius International 
Financial Centre,  which is home to a range of key 
financial services and has been serving as a hub 
for financial services across the continent, has also 
favoured the gradual development of private capital in 
the country. Finally, several Southern African countries 
are member states of the Common Market for Eastern 
and Southern Africa (COMESA) and the Southern 
Africa Development Community (SADC). This gives 
them access to both the COMESA market, which has 
a combined population of 492.5 million and a GDP of 
USD 657.4 billion, and the SADC market, which has a 
combined population of 293 million consumers and a 
GDP of US$700 billion.
Historically, South Africa’s advanced economy has 
not only attracted investors into the region, but 
most importantly it initiated the development of 
the whole industry in the continent. 
2002 - 2008 2009 - 2015 2016 - 2022 H1
Deal Volume
Top Asset Class
Most Active 
Country
Most Active SectorDeal Value
Average Deal Size177
Private Equity
Egypt
Consumer StaplesConsumer  
DiscretionaryIndustrialsUS$5.4bn
US$97mn150
Private Equity
MoroccoUS$2.6bn
US$23mn150
Venture Capital
EgyptUS$4.9bn
US$21mnNorthern Africa
43
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaNorth Africa’s private capital landscape has significantly 
evolved over the last two decades. Despite the 
political and economic instability that the region 
experienced after the outbreak of the Arab Spring in 2010, private capital in North Africa remained 
resilient partly driven by local investors with deep 
local expertise and presence on the ground who 
continued investing in opportunities emerging in the 
region through this geopolitical turmoil. The fact that 
banks were less active and constrained at that time 
coupled with the decreased market competition due 
to the perceived high risk created opportunities for 
domestic players. Specifically, as Figure 13 shows, the 
number of private capital investments grew by 56%, 
from 96 in 2002-2008 to 150 in 2009-2015 despite the 
series of political events which had a significant impact 
on the economic and financial side of businesses. The 
fortitude of North Africa’s private capital industry paved 
the way for its future growth and success. The volume 
of investments more than doubled between 2016-2022 
H1, reaching a record of 330 deals. This exponential 
growth is attributable to Egypt’s emergence as a VC 
hub both in Africa and the wider MENA region, which 
has consequently brought about a surge in the number 
of venture capital investments in Egyptian startups. North Africa’s 
private capital 
landscape has 
significantly 
evolved over the 
last two decades. 
FIGURE 11: Total volume and value of private capital deals reported in North Africa, 2002-
2022H1
0100200300400500600
2002-2008 2009-2015 2016-2022 H1
Value of Deals, US$bn Volume of Deals 0246810
5.4
4.9330
150
96
2.6
Private capital investments in North Africa have 
been focused on sectors that are associated with the 
region’s strong manufacturing base and rising middle-
class demand for improved goods and services. 
Furthermore, resilience to the political and economic instability which hit the region at the beginning of the 
last decade was also a factor that determined the 
most active sectors by deal volume in the region. For 
example, during the Arab Spring uprisings, private 
capital was redirected to defensive sectors which only Source: AVCA
44
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaFIGURE 12: Total volume of private capital deals reported in North Africa, by sector,  
2012 – 2022 H1 stand to grow further with the re-stabilisation of the local 
economy. Overall, Consumer Discretionary, Industrials, 
Healthcare, Consumer Staples, and Materials have 
traditionally attracted the bulk of private capital 
investments in the region. Additionally, in recent years the growing appetite of 
investors for technology and technology enabled 
businesses has favoured the emergence of other 
sectors such as Information Technology and Financials, 
which unlike with other regions have accounted for only 
a small share of private capital deals prior to 2016. 
Financials Information Technology
Communication Services Energy Materials Real EstateConsumer Discretionary Industrials
Consumer Staples UtilitiesHealth Care2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2022 H1 2021 202001020304050607080
Egypt, Africa’s third largest economy with 
the third largest population in Africa, has 
historically accounted for the largest share 
of investments in North Africa. Egypt has 
significantly increased its share of private 
capital deal volume in recent years, even 
through the mass  uprisings that gripped 
the region in 2010, driven by early-stage 
investments in the country’s high growing 
entrepreneurial ecosystem. 
Morocco and Tunisia are the second and 
third largest markets for private capital 
investment in North Africa. The Arab Spring’s 
relatively low impact on Morocco socio-
economic and political landscape compared Egypt, Africa’s third 
largest economy with the 
third largest population 
in Africa, has historically 
accounted for the largest 
share of investments in 
North Africa. Source: AVCA
45
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africato some other countries within the region, together with 
other factors, allowed Morocco to emerge as the most 
active investment destination within North Africa from 
2009-2015. On the other hand, the number of private 
capital investments in Tunisia have decreased in recent 
years. This might be due to the country’s challenging macroeconomic profile at present, which necessitated 
IMF intervention in October 2022 via an Extended Fund 
Facility with the aim to restore macroeconomic stability; 
strengthen social safety nets and tax equity; and step-
up reforms that support an enabling environment for 
inclusive growth and sustainable job creation48.
FIGURE 13: Total volume of private capital deals in North Africa for the top 5 most active 
countries, 2002-2022 H1
2002-2008 2009-2015 2016-2022 H1
Morocco622476
Egypt4338199Tunisia3418 23
Libya1
Algeria812 4
Source: AVCA
Growth drivers fuelling private capital 
investment in North Africa
Despite a series of political and economic events 
which marked North Africa in the beginning of the last 
decade, long term growth drivers have fuelled private 
capital investment. Firstly, the region has a population 
of 257 million people, which represents 3.16% of the 
total world population. This coupled with a young 
working population and a growing middle class has been a significant driver for investments into the region. 
According to data from AfDB, already since 2010 North 
African countries had a much higher concentration of 
the middle class among their population with Tunisia 
having the highest at 89.5% followed by Morocco and 
Egypt at 84.6% and 79.7% respectively49. Additionally, 
North Africa has a strategic position with its proximity 
to Europe, Middle East, and Sub-Saharan Africa, and 
as such the region can play a strategic role in bridging 
the rest of Africa with the other two regions of the 
46
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaThe region has a population of 257 million 
people, which represents 3.16% of the total 
world population. This coupled with a 
young working population and a growing 
middle class has been a significant driver 
for investments into the region. 
Central Africa world. Besides that, North Africa has established trade 
links due to its favourable geographical  position. 
Furthermore, North African countries have undertaken 
reforms to facilitate the ease of doing business for 
investors, and spur investment activity in the region. For example, Tunisia was the first country in Africa to 
pass a Startup Act in April 2018 with the purpose of 
positioning the country as an innovative business hub 
for startups at the crossroads of the Mediterranean 
region, Europe, and Africa. 
2002 - 2008 2009 - 2015 2016 - 2022 H1
Deal Volume
Top Asset Class
Most Active 
Country
Most Active SectorDeal Value
Average Deal Size26
Private Equity
Cameroon
Consumer Staples Consumer Discretionary;  
FinancialsConsumer Staples; 
Consumer Discretionary; 
IndustrialsUS$0.1bn
US$9.1mn44
Private Equity
Democratic Republic 
of CongoUS$0.3bn
US$20mn32
Private Equity
Democratic Republic 
of CongoUS$2.1bn
US$128mn
47
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaCentral Africa has been the most nascent area for 
private capital investment on the continent. A series 
of overlapping crises such as civil conflicts in some 
parts of the region, droughts, and sharp declines in 
oil prices have hit some countries in Central Africa 
hard, creating major macroeconomic challenges50. In 
this environment, the development of private capital in Central Africa hasn’t followed the high growth 
trajectory of other African regions thus remains the least 
developed in Africa. 
Private capital activity in Central Africa has been 
driven by Regional, Sub-Saharan and Pan-African 
funds. Although large Pan-African funds have invested 
opportunistically in Central Africa, impact investment 
funds have largely targeted opportunities within the 
region. Overall, the number of investments has remained 
low throughout the period with a slight increase in 
2009-2015, which was driven by the establishment 
fund managers such as XSML Capital that exclusively 
focused on opportunities in Central Africa. 
On the other hand, the modest increase in deal values 
allocated to Central Africa that occurred between 
2016-2022 H1 was due to large investments in 
the infrastructure sector. Specifically, substantial 
capital allocated to infrastructure projects within 
the Transportation and Utilities sector contributed 
significantly to the increase in deal value in the last five 
years. Central Africa has 
been the most 
nascent area for 
private capital 
investment on the 
continent. 
0100200300400500600
2002-2008 2009-2015 2016-2022 H1
Value of Deals, US$bn Volume of Deals 0246810
0.12.1
324426
0.3FIGURE 14: Total volume and value of private capital deals reported in Central Africa,  
2002-2022 H1
Source: AVCA
48
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaFIGURE 15: Total volume of private capital deals reported in Central Africa, by sector,  
2012 – 2022 H1 
Financials
Information TechnologyCommunication Services
Energy Materials Real EstateConsumer Discretionary
IndustrialsConsumer Staples
UtilitiesHealth Care2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2022 H1 2021 202003691215
Source: AVCAPrivate capital 
investment activity 
in Central Africa 
has been focused on 
consumer-driven 
sectors. Private capital investment activity in Central Africa has 
been focused on consumer-driven sectors. Investments 
in Consumer Discretionary have accounted for the 
largest share of investments within the region since 
2012, particularly in educational institutions and 
companies offering retailing services. Consumer Staples 
has also been one of the most active sectors in the 
region supported by investments in agribusiness and 
food retailing. Overall, the activity of impact-oriented 
funds in the region has significantly encouraged the 
orientation of investments in high-impact sectors 
such as education and agribusiness. 
Finally, Industrials has attracted the second largest share 
of investments in Central Africa due to investments 
in companies offering transportation and logistics 
services, and in larger transport infrastructure 
projects by infrastructure focused funds. Finally, the 
Utilities sector started seeing investments over the 
last few years driven by deals in renewable energy 
infrastructure projects and early-stage investments in 
renewable energy businesses. 
49
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaThe Democratic Republic of Congo, the most populous 
Francophone country in the world with a population of 
around 92 million51 as of 2021, has accounted for the 
largest share of investments in Central Africa. Starting 
from a very low base of deal activity (most likely the 
effect of the Congo Wars that only ended in 2003), the country since attracted the largest share of investments 
within the region. Although investments have been 
made across a variety of sectors, industries benefited 
by the country’s large population (3rd largest in Africa) 
have seen most investments, followed by deals in 
transport services providers that connect the different 
parts of the largest country in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
Despite attracting the second largest share of 
investments in Central Africa, Cameroon has 
experienced a notable drop in its share of deals in the 
region. Development challenges associated with weak 
governance hinders the country’s development and 
ability to attract investors52. 
Overall, complex challenges associated with acute and 
prolonged crises, the confluence of conflict and violence, 
deep poverty, demographic pressures, weak governance, 
chronically high food insecurity, and the impact of climate 
change53 have adversely affected investment flow into 
the Central Africa region, thus impeding the development 
of private capital in the region. The Democratic 
Republic of Congo 
has accounted for 
the largest share 
of investments in 
Central Africa. 
FIGURE 16: Total volume of private capital deals in Central Africa for the top 5 most active 
countries, 2002-2022 H1
2002-2008 2009-2015 2016-2022 H1
Democratic Republic of Congo284 16Cameroon7 19 9
Gabon11 5Chad31
Central African Republic5
Source: AVCA
50
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaFuture Trends
Strategy Focus
Venture capital absorbing a larger market share. 
Venture capital investments accounted for 70% of the 
total volume of private capital deals reported between 
2020 to 2022 H1, up from an average of just 37% 
between 2017 and 2019. The expansion of Africa’s 
venture ecosystem, particularly in the last two years, 
has seen the asset class account for 75% (equivalent 
to US$6.7bn) of the entirety of private capital deal value 
that occurred within the period. Funding is pouring into 
the asset class with dizzying alacrity, positioning venture 
capital to assume an even more significant proportion 
of private capital deal activity in future. Supportive 
legislation enabling innovation and entrepreneurship 
to thrive across the continent, most recently with the 
Nigerian Startup Bill, will further draw capital to the asset 
class. The preceding sets the stage for the emergence 
of venture capital as a dominant investment strategy in 
the continental ecosystem.
Surging demand for private debt. On the back of tenfold 
growth in the past decade, growth forecasts for global 
private debt assets are estimated to reach nearly US$2.7 
trillion by 2026, surpassing real estate to become the 
second-largest private capital asset class54. Reflecting the rise of private debt strategies globally, a growing 
trend is the number of private debt funds that are raising 
capital in Africa. A number of growth drivers will lead to 
the further entrenching of private debt as a preferred 
alternative investment in Africa. Firstly, macroeconomic 
headwinds in 2022 including resurgent inflation, sharp 
moves in interest rates from increasingly protectionist 
central banks, and beleaguered domestic public 
finances have created a somewhat bleak countenance 
for investors facing decreasing values to their public 
and private equities. In this context, private credit will 
likely become “the new financer of the economy”55 
as conventional financial institutions are tied up 
contending with the preceding concerns. Secondly, 
given the significance of energy infrastructure 
investments facilitating renewable energy on the 
continent and the rising popularity of climate investing, 
appetite for private debt will only intensify to meet 
the need for concessional, catalytic climate capital in 
project finance. As such, private credit capital structures 
will emerge from the periphery to become a key 
component of the African investment ecosystem in the 
medium-term future.
Sector Focus
Financials consistently emerges as a prominent sector 
for private investment in Africa driven by outstanding 
growth in financial technology. The dominance of 
FinTech reflects not only the global leadership of Africa 
in terms of penetration of mobile money, but also the 
natural sequence of establishing a digital infrastructure 
as the first step toward the digital transformation of other significant industries in the consumer space. 
Given the long-term growth fundamentals driving the 
growth of FinTech (such as accelerating mobile and 
internet penetration in Africa and challenges related 
to traditional banking infrastructure and services) we 
expect financial services to pilot the growth of private 
capital investments in Africa in the next few years. 
The dominance of FinTech reflects not 
only the global leadership of Africa in 
terms of penetration of mobile money, 
but also the natural sequence of 
establishing a digital infrastructure 
51
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaInformation Technology is another sector driving 
increased investor interest and appetite for private 
capital in Africa. Fuelling the attractiveness of the 
sector is the relatively low level of legacy infrastructure, 
which serves as a unique advantage to emerging 
entrepreneurs on the continent. In particular, African 
startups are enabling the rest of the economy to 
migrate to digital solutions in a wide variety of 
industries including Agribusiness, Healthcare and 
Mobility - achieving inclusion, employment and value 
generation. The necessity of tech-centred innovation 
will only grow, both on the continent and globally, as 
new habits adopted during the Covid-19 pandemic by 
consumers (e-commerce), employers (remote working 
practice), students (e-Learning) and service providers 
(mobile money, online last-mile delivery) shift to 
become mainstream practice. Information Technology 
has substantially disrupted and transformed the 
development of several other industries, and, in 
recognition of its catalytic role, it will remain a high 
priority for Africa-focused investors. The demand for reliable and affordable energy has 
created a compelling case for the adoption of modern 
renewable energy in Africa, leading to the rise of 
Utilities developing as one of the highest-interest 
emerging sectors for private investment. Investor 
focus on renewable energy is catalysed by the enormity 
of Africa’s energy deficit, and the productive limitations 
of traditional energy sources in Africa. Emerging 
technologies looking to leapfrog the generation and 
consumption of energy have been an increasing focus 
of venture capital investment in Africa. This enabling 
technology is not only driving down the cost of 
renewable energy production, but it also arms investors 
and businesses with the necessary tools to capitalise 
on Africa’s electrification needs, which are acute. 
Illustratively, over 640 million Africans have no access 
to energy. This corresponds to an electricity access 
rate of just over 40% for African countries- the lowest 
in the world56. In this environment, private capital fund 
managers have an important role to play in supporting 
the continent with its renewable energy transition, and 
as such we expect them to remain attracted by the high 
potential of this sector. 
Region Focus
The Big 4 (Egypt, Kenya, Nigeria, South Africa) remain 
the giants of Africa’s silicon savannah, continually 
attracting the lion’s share of both private capital deal 
volume and value. Regional trends in capital distribution 
outlined earlier in this section will likely persist in the 
medium to long term - particularly if the macroeconomic 
uncertainties of 2022 carry forward into 2023, which 
would likely see investors retreat into familiar markets 
with diversified and advanced economies. However, 
some emerging markets outside of Africa’s leading 
quartet, particularly within Francophone West Africa, have also shown marginal year-on-year 
growth that will likely endear investor interest in 
the short-term future. Concomitant to the maturation 
of Africa’s private capital industry is increasing levels 
of geographical diversity, as investors prove eager 
to explore opportunities in countries with promising 
growth determinants, low market penetration and low 
competition. This trend towards heterogeneity will 
solidify in the future, supported by increasing levels of 
both cross-country and cross-sector collaboration as 
well as regional integration.The demand for reliable and affordable 
energy has created a compelling case 
for the adoption of modern renewable 
energy in Africa, leading to the rise 
of Utilities developing as one of the 
highest-interest emerging sectors for 
private investment.
52
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaEndnotes
1 AVCA, 2014. Guide to Private Equity in Africa: 2013/2014 AVCA Member Directory 
2 AVCA, 2018. An Untold Story of Responsible Investing in Africa
3 White & Case, 2017. Private Equity in Africa: Emerging Trends
4 Bhattacharya, A., Montiel, P. and Sharma, S., 1997. How Can Sub-Saharan Africa Attract More Private Capital Inflows?
5 Harvard Business School, 2021. The Future of Alternative Investments Industry
6 Allen, F., Otchere, I. and Senbet., L., 2011. African Financial Systems: A Review
7 Only final closed funds that focus solely on Africa or have an allocation to Africa alongside a broader emerging markets 
investment mandate are included in this analysis. Funds with a global investment remit that invest in Africa are excluded.
8 France Invest, 2019. Guide to Private Equity in Africa: Investing in Business Growth in Africa
9 FSD Africa, 2022. Study On Private Debt Markets In Africa
10 AVCA, 2022. African Private Equity Activity Report
11 Boston Consulting Group, 2016. Why Africa Remains Ripe for Private Equity
12 AVCA, 2022. African Private Equity Activity Report
13 Mayer Brown, 2016. Feeder Funds
14 AVCA, 2021. Pension Funds and Private Equity in Nigeria
15 Cliffe, Dekker & Hofmeyr, 2021. Is the SPAC back?
16 A protected cell company is a single legal entity comprised of two organic parts: a core that is linked to and manages one 
or more cells, that are each independent of one another and have unique assets and liabilities.
17 ZEDRA Group, 2020. Understanding Cell Companies and Their Benefits
18 Financier Worldwide, 2014. Protected Cell Companies For Fund And Non-Fund Structures
19 Please note “offshore” refers to markets and jurisdictions that are not located on the continent of Africa, while “onshore” 
refers to markets and jurisdictions located on the continent of Africa, excluding island nations (i.e., Mauritius).
20 JTC Americas, 2022. The Role of a Fund Administration — Past and Present
21 Temenos, 2021. South Africa’s Largest Fund Administrator Goes Live with Temenos
22 White & Case, 2017. Africa Focus: Private equity in Africa - Emerging Trends
23 LSEG Africa Advisory Group, 2018. The Challenges and Opportunities of SME Financing in Africa
24 AVCA, 2016. Guide to PE in Africa 
25 The Economist, 2000. The Hopeless Continent 
26 Brookings, 2015. Africa in Focus: How Finance Flows to Africa
27 Gugu, S. and Mworia, W., 2017. Venture Capital in East Africa: Is There a Right Model?
28 McKinsey & Company, 2010. What’s Driving Africa’s Growth  
29 IMF, 2022. A frica’s Rapid Economic Growth Hasn’t Fully Closed Income Gaps
30 The World Bank, 2022. Overview: The World Bank in Senegal 
31 Bloomberg, 2022. Senegal Seen Leading Sub-Saharan Africa’s Growth in 2023
32 Africa Renewal, 2022. AFCFTA’s Guided Trade Initiative Takes Off, Set to Ease and Boost Intra-African Trade
33 Novastar Ventures, 2022. East Africa’s Evolving Venture Capital Industry
34 Intellecap, 2018. Fintrek: Exploring New Frontiers in FinTech Investments in East Africa
35 World Bank Open Data Database 
36 Kenya High Commission, 2022. Why Invest in Kenya
37 The World Bank, 2022. The World Bank in Rwanda
38 East Africa Community, 2022. EAC and Investment
39 Ethiopian Monitor, 2022. Ethiopia Opens up Financial Sector to Foreign Investors
40 African Development Bank, 2022. East Africa Regional Overview
41 Ibid
42 East Africa Community, 2022. Trade
43 AVCA, 2022. Venture Capital in Africa Report
44 AVCA, 2022. AVCA Country Snapshot: Senegal 
45 Ernst & Young Global, 2020. Why Africa is Becoming a Bigger Player in the Global Economy
53
Funds and Fund Management Services in Africa46 The Absa Group and OMFIF, 2022. Absa Africa Financial Markets Index 2022
47 The World Bank, 2022. The World Bank in Zambia 
48 International Monetary Fund, 2022. IMF Staff Reaches Staff-Level Agreement on an Extended Fund Facility with Tunisia
49 African Development Bank, 2011. Middle of the Pyramid: Dynamics of the Middle Class in Africa
50 International Monetary Fund, 2022. CEMAC and the IMF
51 The World Bank, 2022. The World Bank in DRC
52 The World Bank, 2022. The World Bank in Cameroon  
53 UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 2021. West and Central Africa
54 Preqin, 2022. 2022 Preqin Global Private Debt Report
55 IQ-EQ, 2022. The Private Debt Revolution Is Here
56 African Development Bank, 2019. Light Up and Power Africa – A New Deal on Energy for Africa
54
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaAcknowledgment
The Funds and Fund Management Services Report was developed in collaboration with a consortium of industry 
experts that shared key lessons learned and recommendations of best practice for the development of the Funds 
and Fund Management Industry in Africa.
We would like to thank Admaius Capital Partners, BFA Asset Management, BK Capital, Bowmans, Olajide Oyewole 
LLP (A member of DLA Piper Africa), Webber Wentzel, World Alliance of International Financial Centers, Casablanca 
Finance City, Jersey Finance, Kigali International Financial Centre, Nairobi International Financial Centre and 
Luxemburg For Finance, for their invaluable contribution.
55
Funds and Fund Management Services in AfricaE avca@avca-africa.org
W www.avca.africa
C www.avcaconference.com
T +44 (0)20 3874 7008Contact AVCA
37 North Row, 3rd Floor
London W1K 6DHContact Rwanda Finance Limited
Kigali / Rwanda
BPR-PCD Tower, 4th FloorFor further information, please contact
research@avca-africa.org
E info@rfl.rw
W www.kifc.rw
T +250 786 422260

Extracted from: 02175-avca-vc-report-2023_4-final-1.pdf
Venture Capital 
in Africa  Report
APRIL 2023
2
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Table of Contents
2022 Venture Capital In Africa: Key Facts 3
A Y ear in Review 4
Venture Capital Deal Activity: Global Trends 7
1.1 International Breakdown of Venture Capital Activity in 2022 7
1.2 A Downturn in Global Venture Funding 8
1.3 Venture Capital in Africa: A Global Comparison 9
Venture Capital Deal Activity in Africa 11
2.1 Volume of Venture Capital Deals in Africa 11
2.2 Value of Venture Capital Deals in Africa 12
2.3 First-Time Venture Financing  13
Investment Stage Focus 13
3.1 Venture Capital Deal Activity by Stage 13
3.2 Venture Capital Deal Activity by Ticket Size 15
3.3 Median Value of Venture Capital Deals in Africa 16Geographic Focus 16
4.1 Venture Capital Deal Activity by Region 16
4.2 Venture Capital Deal Activity by Country 19
4.3 North Africa Countries Spotlight 20
Sector Focus 22
5.1 Venture Capital Deal Activity by Sector 22
5.2 Rising Sectors of Interest  23
5.3 Venture Debt Deal Activity by Sector 27
Super Sized Deals 28
Impact & Diversity Focus 30
7.1 Impact Focus 30
7.2 Diversity Focus 32
Investor Profile 35
8.1 Investor Profile by Type 35
8.2 Investor Profile by Location 37
Research Methodology 39US$6.5 bnacross 853 deals, including 
US$1.3 billion of venture 
debtMARKET SIZE
Startups raising their first round of 
venture financing  accounted for 37%  
of venture deal volume37%FIRST TIME FUNDING
15 Super-Sized Deals with a cumulative 
US$2.2 billion  raisedSUPER-SIZED DEALS
US$2.0 mnUS$2.0 million median 
venture capital deal size
US$5.6 million median 
venture debt deal sizeDEAL SIZE
unique companies  backed by a 
fund manager 448PE & VC FUND MANAGER BACKING
157 unique companies  backed by at least 
one impact investor  (venture capital)IMPACT INVESTOR BACKING
26% of funding recipients were startups with 
a female founder or startups with gender 
diverse founding teams  (venture capital)DIVERSITY
Financials  was the most active sector 
by venture capital deal volume (31%) and 
attracted the largest share of venture 
capital deal value (42%)SECTOR FOCUS
West Africa  attracted the largest proportion 
of venture capital deal volume in Africa 
(30%), driven by Nigeria  which was the 
most active country by volume  at 22%REGIONAL FOCUS
of investors active in Africa’s 
venture landscape in 2022 were 
international investors while 23%  
were African investors77%A GLOBAL HUB
3
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
2022 Venture Capital in Africa: Key Facts
Summary of Key Findings
2022 remained a record-breaking year for 
venture capital in Africa by deal volume, 
maintaining a three-year accelerated 
growth curve in capital deployment for 
the asset class. While capital invested into 
African startups faltered slightly, the total 
amount raised remained relatively stable 
in 2022 and maintained the record set in 
2021. With the inclusion of venture debt, 
venture inflows to Africa last year stood at 
US$6.5 billion raised across 853 deals.  
Despite Africa’s slight funding dip in 2022, when viewed in isolation the data 
for the year is promising. Most indicators of market activity in 2022 equalled 
or came close to the record highs of the preceding year. When evaluated 
against any year other than the stratospheric 2021, industry activity in 
Africa’s venture capital ecosystem was very strong. When graded against the 
global performance of venture capital, the industry does even better. Unlike 
the 32% tailspin in global venture capital, the 1% contraction in the value 
drawn by Africa’s venture ecosystem in 2022 is evidence of the fortitude 
of the industry, the commitment of investors active on the continent, and 
the unique resilience of African businesses that don’t require capital rich 
environments to succeed.The 2022 median deal size across all investment stages 
was US$2.0 million , a 43% increase from the 2021 full-
year median of US1.4 million.By region, West Africa  maintained the top spot for the 
second consecutive year, with Nigeria  as the most active 
country both in the region and on the continent.
The path to parity gained momentum - startups with a 
gender diverse founding team  raised a cumulative total 
close to US$950 million .Startups raising their first round of venture financing 
only accounted for 37%  of VC deal volume in 2022. 15 super-sized deals  in companies raising both venture 
capital and venture debt took place in 2022, with a 
combined value of US$2.2 billion.Dealmaking was concentrated in the Financials  sector, 
which assumed 31% of deal volume and 42% of deal value.
1,000+ investors  were active in Africa’ s venture 
ecosystem in 2022.
4
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
A Year in ReviewA Lean Y ear for Venture Capital
Global investments in venture capital reached US$445 billion in 2022, a 
32% YoY decrease after a record year of growth for this asset class in 2021. 
In fact, global venture capital fell prey to persistent market instability, 
which was aggravated by geopolitical crises, supply chain disruptions, and 
unprecedented inflationary pressures, which led to an increase in interest 
rates. As a result, these factors had a compound negative effect on venture 
capital deal flow. Both globally and in Africa, the fall in investments noticeably 
takes effect in the second half of the year. Two thirds (67%) of venture deal 
value in Africa for 2022 can be attributed to deals that occurred in 2022 
H1. 2022 got off to a very strong start – the strongest half-year activity the 
continent has seen to date – and this record performance bolstered annual 
figures after an anaemic 2022 H2.
From Takeoff to Layoff
Headlines detailing thousands of tech-related job losses made their rounds 
in 2022. Although news about industry layoffs were largely preoccupied with 
tech titans in the United States such as Amazon, Google, Meta, Microsoft 
and Twitter, the mass dismissals that swept through the tech industry 
also trickled into Africa in 2022. Chipper Cash , Wave Mobile Money , Sendy 
and Twiga Foods , some of the continent’s better known and well-funded 
startups, all cut their headcounts by 15% to 30% in 2022. In addition to 
downsizing, some startups closed operations entirely in key jurisdictions. 
South African based on-demand home cleaning startup SweepSouth  closed 
its Nigerian and Kenyan operations in November 2022, while in the same 
month Egypt-based Swvl  also shut down its operations in Pakistan. 
Although industry layoffs were in part due to market instability and declining 
revenue resulting from falling consumer demand, a large number were also 
due to necessary streamlining of workforce after inflated hiring during the 
Covid-19 pandemic to cope with heightened demand. The nature of staff 
being let go in the African context also differs to its North American and 
European counterparts. A large percentage of layoffs amongst Africa’s tech 
firms targeted business support and not tech-related roles. Overall, the 
need for, and relative scarcity of, tech talent across Africa remains a more pressing concern than broad global layoffs1. And while the trend towards 
cash-strapped startups reducing costs by trimming staff has continued into 
2023, job creation by funded African tech startups far outweighs layoffs. 
Notably, the number of jobs created by VC-backed African startups saw YoY 
increases of close to 100% in 2022, employing over 34,000 people across 
the continent2. 
Venture Debt
Venture debt has emerged from the periphery to become a key component 
of the African investment ecosystem in recent years, as early stage and 
high-growth companies opt to remain private longer and seek creative 
forms of financing that minimize founder dilution. The combination of a 
lower cost of capital and flexible repayment terms have led to the increasing 
popularity of the asset class as an attractive alternative to traditional equity 
financing, enabling startups to scale their businesses without sacrificing 
their ownership stake. 
Several already well capitalised startups raised venture debt to facilitate 
market expansion in 2022. For example, Yellow Africa  raised US$20 million 
in a series of debt transactions from a consortium of lenders to enable the 
company to expand its distribution network of pay-as-you-go solar home 
systems beyond Malawi to Uganda, Rwanda and Zambia; and provide the 
startup with bridge capital whilst it prepares to raise a Series B equity round3. 
Similarly, Solarise Africa , an energy leasing company for solar assets, raised 
US$33.4 million of debt funding to help it grow and expand its portfolio in 
Kenya and other selected African countries.
Reflecting this increased uptake of venture debt strategies and the 
diversification of capital structures in African venture capital, the 
methodology for this report was expanded in 2022 to track pure / exclusive 
venture debt dealmaking. 67 venture debt deals with a cumulative value of 
US$1.3 billion took place last year, making use of a variety of instruments 
including mezzanine financing, direct lending, and convertible loan notes. 
Venture debt fundraising was also on the radar of investors last year. TLG 
Capital and Future Africa launched a US$25 million venture debt fund from 
TLG’s existing funds in December 20224.
5
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Venture Capital Fundraising
Venture capital fundraising proved an exception to the downward trend in 
private capital fundraising in Africa, which registered a 54% YoY decrease 
from the US$4.4 billion raised in 2021, according to the 2022 African Private 
Capital Activity Report5. 9 venture capital funds raised a cumulative US$0.4 
billion in capital commitments at final close last year, with the figure rising 
to over US$1.0 billion with the inclusion of the value raised by interim closes. 
While modest, this value nevertheless represents an annual increase of 
5.3x and is particularly noteworthy given the highly competitive fundraising 
environment for venture capital fund managers both globally and in Africa 
last year.
Africa’s newest wave of private fund managers are predominantly adopting 
venture capital strategies. Illustratively, over two thirds of the first-time 
private capital managers active in Africa in 2022 and reached final closes 
were raising venture capital funds – a majority of which were below US$100 
million in size. Examples of first-time fund managers that reached interim 
closes in 2022 include the US$36 million first close of the gender-lens Janngo 
Capital Startup Fund , the US$9.6 million first close of the Tunisia-based 216 
Capital Fund , and the US$8 million first close of the Egypt Deep-Tech Fund  by 
Sequence Ventures. The rise of fund managers with an exclusively venture 
capital focus reflects the maturation of the asset class and its growing 
attractiveness to limited partners.
A Global Hub for Venture Capital
Africa was a global hub for venture capital in 2022, with both familiar and new 
investors coming to the table. Foreign investors outnumbered domestic 
investors dealmaking on the continent in 2022, with Africa-based investors 
accounting for slightly less than a quarter (23%) of the total number of investors 
active in Africa in the same period. There was also significant elevation in the 
number of investors backing the innovative solutions African entrepreneurs 
brought to market in 2022. In an industry-first accomplishment, the number 
of investors that took part in VC deals on the continent topped a thousand in 
2022 across both venture capital and venture debt deals. A broad consortium of global investors were dealmaking in Africa last year 
– from multi-billion dollar American VC fund managers (Tiger Global, Avenir 
Growth Capital) to corporate venture firms from the Asia-Pacific region 
(Softbank, Temasek and Tencent Holdings) and high-net-worth investors 
such as Serena Williams (via VC firm Serena Ventures), Jack Dorsey (via 
digital-payments company Block ) and Justin Mateen (via VC Fund JAM 
Fund ). While the presence of global investors signals investor confidence in 
the industry, particularly promising was the presence of Africa focused fund 
managers leading early-stage funding rounds in 2022. Continental investors 
including AfricInvest, Aruwa Capital Management, CardinalStone, KawiSafi  
and TLCom (to name a few) all led or co-led seed and early stage rounds in 
2022. Given the often-cyclical nature of foreign investment in Africa which is 
contingent on global macro-economic trends, the emergence and increasing 
participation of indigenous capital allocators with a long-term commitment 
to the continent bodes well for the future of the industry.
Conclusion
2022 was certainly a lean year for venture capital, but several silver linings 
remain. A look at the bigger picture quickly nullifies concerns of what may 
appear at first glance to be below-potential growth in 2022. The fact that 
Africa recorded positive net growth in 2022 is in itself remarkable when 
compared to the global context, which experienced significant contractions 
in venture capital deal activity to varying regional degrees. While far from 
unaffected, Africa remained one of the fastest growing VC markets globally 
in 2022, proving bullish despite an unfavourable macroeconomic climate. 
The US$6.5 billion raised across 853 deals (including US$1.3 billion of venture 
debt) in 2022 proves the industry’s ability to shoulder shock and remain 
constant in crisis. 
The fourth edition of AVCA’s Venture Capital in Africa  report chronicles the 
maturation of Africa’s entrepreneurial space between 2014 and 2022. In so 
doing, this report exemplifies AVCAs commitment to being part of Africa’s 
growth story by providing independent industry research that supports 
actors on both the supply and demand sides of capital.
6
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Africa
786 DealsUS$5.2 bn
Latin America
1085 DealsUS$8.3 bn
Global
30,977 DealsUS$445 bn
Europe
7619 DealsUS$89.5 bn
Asia
6860 DealsUS$108 bnNorth America
13,251 DealsUS$225.5 bn1.1 International Breakdown of Venture Capital* Activity in 2022
* Please note this is a breakdown of venture capital deal volume and value only. The deal values presented here 
only include mezzanine and debt when the latter is part of a larger transaction that also involves equity.
Source: Crunchbase 2022 Global Funding Report
7
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Venture Capital Deal Activity: Global TrendsHow the mighty have fallen. Or at least, that is how it may appear at first 
glance when looking at the final tally of venture funding globally, which 
shrunk by 32% from the US$681 billion invested in 2021. Global venture 
capital fell prey to continuous market instability, rapidly rising interest 
rates, geopolitical crises and surging inflation that turned whispers of a 
global macroeconomic downturn to near-unanimous predictions of a global 
recession by the start of 2023. Declines in VC funding in 2022 can also be 
attributed to the bursting of the tech bubble. The downturn in tech activity, 
stock prices and valuations had a spill over effect on venture capital funding, 
considering the preponderance of tech or tech-enabled startups which 
historically draws the largest share of venture capital deal flow. The fall in 
venture investments noticeably takes effect in the second half of the year, 
coinciding with sharp moves in interest rates stemming from increasingly 
aggressive counter-inflationary measures by central banks, triggering a risk-
off investor sentiment in developed and emerging markets alike.
By region, North America once again accounted for the largest share of 
VC investment globally, closing out the year with just over US$225 billion 
(51% of the global total), with the US responsible for the vast majority of 
this investment. Asia came a distant second with a total US$108 billion, 
experiencing the second largest regional drop in venture funding despite 
having six deals valued at US$500 million+ under its belt last year. Funding 
declines in these two regions were responsible for a large chunk of the drop in 
funding globally, with the United States accounting for US$104 billion (44%) 
of the funding deficit in 2022, while Asia was responsible for US$69.2 billion 
(29%) of the US$236 billion gap in global venture capital between 2021 and 
2022. Europe contributed US$89.5 billion to the global venture funding total 
in 2022, while Latin America, which experiencing the sharpest drop (59%) in 
VC investment compared to 2021, contributed US$8.3 million.Overall, 2022 was undoubtedly a challenging year for VC investment 
globally, with total global venture capital climaxing at $445 billion for the 
year. Venture capitalists put US$100 billion more to work last year than 
they did in 2020, despite tighter investor purse strings and an increasingly 
unfavourable funding climate in 2022. VC funds were, however, sitting on 
a record US$586 of dry powder in 20226, on the back of strong fundraising 
activity the previous year. This therefore begs the question – were the low 
deployment levels and decrease in activity during 2022 only considered so 
when compared to the stratospheric levels of 2021, but otherwise strong 
when viewed in isolation? Or does it represent the beginning of a downturn 
in global venture funding?
Figure 1: Volume and Value (US$bn) of Global Venture Capital, 2022
Source: Crunchbase 2022 Global Funding Report02,0004,0006,0008,00010,000
Q1
2021Q2
2021Q3
2021Q4
2021Q1
2022Q2
2022Q3
2022Q4
2022155167173187
163
122
8377
Value (US$bn) Volume
VC Deal VolumeNorth America once again accounted 
for the largest share of VC investment 
globally, closing out the year with just over 
US$225 billion
8
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
1.2 A Downturn in Global Venture FundingAfrica raised US$5.2 billion in venture capital 
across 786 deals in 2022, representing 3% of the 
total volume and 1.2% of the total value of global 
venture funding in 2022. While the global venture 
market experienced significant contractions in 
startup funding to varying regional degrees, 
Africa’s venture ecosystem was relatively 
stable and only experienced a funding drop 
of less than US$50 million compared to 2021. 
Comparatively, Latin America saw the biggest 
YoY declines in startup funding to the tune of  
59%, followed by Asia which saw contractions 
of  35%. Consequently, the funding gap between 
Africa’s closest socio-economic comparator, 
Latin America, saw a near-fivefold decrease from 
US$14.8 billion in 2021 to US$3.1 billion in 2022. 
Although the volume and value of venture capital 
in Africa is relatively small compared to other 
regions such as North America and Asia, it has 
been growing steadily in recent years and shows 
potential for further growth in the future.Figure 2: Global Comparison of Y o Y Changes to VC Deal Volume and Value, 20227 
Volume ValueYoY Change (2021 vs. 2022)Global Europe Asia North
AmericaLatin
AmericaAfrica
-3%7%
-59%-35%-32% -32%-7%
-23%-9%
-24%-1%21%
Source: AVCA Database & Crunchbase  2022 Global Funding ReportAfrica raised US$5.2 billion in venture capital across 786 deals 
in 2022, representing 3% of the total volume and 1.2% of the 
total value of global venture funding in 2022
US$5.2 billion
9
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
1.3 Venture Capital in Africa: A Global ComparisonAlthough the highest deal value in Africa can’t compare with deal maximums 
in other regions, Africa remains competitive by median deal values. At the 
seed stage, Africa’s median deal value fell slightly short of the global average 
of US2.0 million. However, Africa’s median deal value significantly exceeded 
the global average at both the early stage (at US$10 million compared to 
the global US$5 million) and also at the late stage (standing at US$45 million 
compared to the global US$7.9 million).
Figure 3a: Global Comparison of Median Deal Size at the Seed Stage  
(US$ mn), 20228 Figure 3b: Global Comparison of Median Deal Size at the Early Stage  
(US$ mn), 2022
Figure 3c: Global Comparison of Median Deal Size at the Late Stage  
(US$ mn), 20222.5
2.0
1.7
1.5
1.2
Global Africa Americas Europe Asia0.51.01.52.02.53.0
2018 2019 2020 2022 2021
45.0
10.0
10.0
7.9
5.0
Global Africa Americas Europe Asia020406080100
2018 2019 2020 2022 202110.0
8.4
5.1
5.0
2.2
Global Africa Americas Europe Asia2018 2019 2020 2022 20210246810
Source: AVCA Database and KPMG Q4 2022 Venture Pulse – Global Trends Report  
10
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
2.1 Volume of Venture Capital Deals in Africa
786 2,436 venture capital deals; a 
21% increase from the 
650 VC deals reported 
in 202167venture debt deals in 
Africa in 2022VENTURE CAPITAL DEAL VOLUME IN 
AFRICA, 2022VENTURE DEBT DEAL VOLUME IN AFRICA, 
2022TOTAL VENTURE DEAL VOLUME IN AFRICA, 
2014-2022
Venture capital dealmaking in 2022 saw the industry maintain a near-decade 
long legacy of continuous annual growth, with 786 deals concluded on the 
continent. The total volume of VC deals that took place in 2022 nevertheless 
represents an industry record, witnessing 21% YoY growth from the year 
before. With the inclusion of the 67 venture debt deals that took place last 
year, the overall annual total for 2023 closed out at 853 deals.  
A look at the bigger picture is necessary to assuage concerns of what may 
appear at first glance to be below-potential growth in 2022, particularly as the 
ecosystem comes down from a two-year trend of triple digit acceleration. 
Firstly, the fact that Africa recorded positive net growth in 2022 is in itself 
remarkable when compared to the global context, which experienced 
significant contractions in venture capital deal activity to varying regional 
degrees. Secondly, this growth is in line with the historic evolution of the 
industry, whose story is not one of growth at a breakneck pace but rather one 
of steady, incremental maturation. Venture capital deal flow in Africa grew at 
a Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 31% between 2014 and 2022. 
The increase in VC deal volume on the continent in 2022 is relatively modest 
when viewed with a short-term lens, but when viewed with a historical lens 
tells a growth story of consistency in crisis. While far from unaffected, Africa 
remains one of the fastest growing VC markets globally, remaining bullish 
despite an unfavourable macroeconomic climate. KEY FINDINGS: 
Figure 4: VC Deal Volume in Africa, By Y ear
2018 2019 2020 2022 2021 2014 2015 2016 2017
Venture Capital Venture Debt67
786853
319
140114 101 96 9469CAGR 2014-2022 +31%650
11
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Venture Capital Deal Activity in AfricaKEY FINDINGS: 
VENTURE CAPITAL DEAL VALUE IN AFRICA, 2022
US$5.2  billion
MEDIAN VENTURE CAPITAL DEAL SIZE IN AFRICA, 
2022
US$2.0  million
VENTURE DEBT DEAL VALUE IN AFRICA, 2022
US$1.3  billion
MEDIAN VENTURE DEBT DEAL SIZE IN AFRICA, 
2022
US$5.6  million
TOTAL VENTURE DEAL VALUE IN AFRICA, 2014 – 2022
US$16.7  billion
MEDIAN VENTURE CAPITAL  DEAL SIZE IN AFRICA, 
2014 – 2022
US$1.8  million
Although 2022 started strong, with the strongest half-year activity the 
continent has seen to date, the macroeconomic turbulence which shook 
the global venture market finally caught up to Africa in the second half of 
the year. Africa’s venture ecosystem was relatively stable in 2022 and only 
registered a very slight decrease (1%) in the total amount raised by African 
startups compared to 2021, with US$5.2 billion raised from 722 unique 
companies. However, unlike the 32% tailspin in global venture capital, Africa’s 
slight funding dip in 2022 is evidence of the fortitude of the industry which 
emerged bruised but not broken from 2022. Africa’s venture ecosystem held 
on to 2021’s funding high, proving its ability to shoulder shock and weather 
unpredictability; first  through the Covid-19 pandemic and now through the 
general decline in the  global economy. 
One reason for the modest decline in the value of venture capital channelled 
to the continent is the fall of large-ticket funding rounds in 2022, particularly 
in the second half of the year. 17 deals accounting for 39% of the annual 
total fell into the US$50mn+ category last year, compared to 25 deals of the 
same size in 2021. Another reason is the comparative increase in deal activity 
whose deal values were not disclosed in 2022, which stood at 30% compared 
to just 18% in 2021. The US$5.2 billion recorded in 2022 thus represents 
the minimum threshold of aggregate VC deal value in Africa, which could 
plausibly be significantly higher in reality. With the inclusion of the venture debt category, the overall annual total for 2022 
closed out at US$6.5 billion. More specifically, African startups raised US$1.3 billion 
of venture debt last year, through a variety of instruments including mezzanine 
financing, direct lending, and convertible loan notes, among others.
Figure 5:  VC Deal Value in Africa, By Y ear (US$bn)
2018 2019 2020 2022 2021 2014 2015 2016 2017
Venture Capital Venture Debt1.3
5.26.5
1.11.5
0.70.30.6CAGR 2014-2022 +33%5.2
0.4 0.4
12
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
2.2 Value of Venture Capital Deals in AfricaKEY FINDINGS: 3.1 Venture Capital Deal Activity by Stage
SEED
The early stages of the venture capital continuum once again saw the most 
activity in 2022. In a recurring trend, the seed stage assumed the largest 
proportion venture capital deal activity in Africa, accounting for close to 
half of the venture deal flow to startups on the continent last year. Deals 
at the seed stage were also the largest-growing market segment in 2022, 
demonstrating YoY growth of 45% to stand at 355 (up from 245 deals in 2021). 
The median value of deals in this category also rose to US$1.5 million in 2022  
from US$1.0 million in 2021. With the volume of seed-stage deals increasing 
steadily year-on-year, this growing sample also illustrates how startups have 
concurrently been raising larger seed funding rounds. 
The continued prominence of seed-stage deals in Africa’s venture capital 
landscape lies partially in the surge in entrepreneurial activity being seen 
across the continent. The sheer breadth of pre-revenue startups seeking 
early-stage development capital has created a demand for seed financing in 
Africa. Considering there were well over 900,000 new business registrations 
in Africa in 2020 alone9, the predominance of this investment stage shows 
no sign of future abatement.
E ARLY STAGE
131 early-stage venture capital deals took place in Africa in 2022, demonstrating a 
25% increase from the year before where 105 early-stage deals were concluded 
on the continent. The majority of these were in the Series A (and adjacent) 
category, while 27% fell in the Series B (and adjacent) category10. Notable early-
stage deals that took place in 2022 include the US$50 million Series B Egyptian 
financial services platform PayMob  and the US$32 million Series A in Ramani , a 
Tanzanian retail-tech startup for fast moving consumer goods.63% 37%
Follow-OnFirstThe majority of dealmaking in 2022 was follow-on (i.e., repeat or subsequent 
financing of companies) rather than first-time financing. 62 unique companies 
were recipients of more than one round of deals in 2022 specifically, 
corresponding to 8% of the total number of VC-backed startups in Africa last 
year. The rest of follow-on venture financing that took place in 2022 went to 409 
unique companies that each raised venture capital funding in previous years.
Amongst first time recipients of capital, 52% of transactions were at the seed 
stage, with only a small cohort (4%) of first-time capital recipients doing so 
at the early-stage (i.e. pre-series A or series A transactions). 
Figure 6: First-Time Venture Financings of Companies in Africa, 2022
Startups raising their first round of 
venture financing accounted for over a 
third of VC deal volume in 2022
13
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
2.3 First-Time Venture Financing Investment Stage FocusFigure 7: Annual Evolution of VC Deal Volume, by Stage, 2014-202211LATE STAGE
Investors put US$1.1 billion to work across 16 late stage deals in 2022, in a 
6% drop by volume and a 51% drop by value. Although it was the only 
investment stage to witness any YoY declines in 2022, the fall of late-stage 
funding does not undermine progress made in the last decade, where deal 
activity in this category grew at a CAGR of 36% by volume and 25% by value. 
It is also important to note that 2021 also saw a spike of Series E deals (namely 
6 deals with a cumulative value of US$867 million). This is a rarity in Africa’s 
funding landscape, and thus magnified values in the late-stage category in 
2021. Given the limited cohort of companies eligible for similar late-stage 
funding, it is only to be expected that the industry self-corrected in 2022, 
with only one Series E transaction on record for the year. Nevertheless, even 
with this slowdown in late-stage funding, a number of high-profile late-stage 
deals took place last year, including the US$260 million Series D in off-grid 
solar energy provider Sun King  and Flutterwave’s  US$250 million Series D 
round in February 2022. Another standout is the US$91 million Series C 
round in South African chat commerce provider Clickatell . 
Figure 8: Annual Evolution of VC Deal Value, by Stage, 2014-20222018 2019 2020 2022 2021 2014 2015 2016 2017
Seed Early Stage Late Stage Series Unknown Venture Debt67
284
131
35516853
319
140114 101 96 9469650
2018 2019 2020 2022 2021 2014 2015 2016 2017
Seed Early Stage Late Stage Series Unknown Venture Debt1.3
1.0
1.1
2.3
0.86.5
1.11.5
0.70.30.65.2
0.4 0.4The fall of late-stage funding does not 
undermine progress made in the last 
decade, where deal activity in this category 
grew at a CAGR of 36% by volume and 25% 
by value. 
14
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
When categorised by ticket size, 
27% of venture capital deals by 
volume were less than US$1 
million in size, although these only 
contributed to 2% of the total value 
of deals concluded in Africa in 2022. 
However, the concentration of deals 
in the million and under category 
fell significantly from 2021, where it 
assumed over a third (38%) of the 
total number of deals that took place 
that year. 
Having previously cornered the 
market at 61% in 2021, deals in the 
US$50 million+ category assumed 
39% of annual deal values in 
2022, reflecting the global trend 
of declining late-stage funding 
rounds in 2022. Although to a lesser 
degree than in previous years, this 
category nevertheless accounted 
for the largest proportion of deal 
values in 2022. This is partially the 
result of larger, high profile funding 
rounds appearing at earlier stages 
than has been the case historically. 
Illustratively, five of the eleven 
super-sized deals (deals with a value 
of US$100 million or more) that 
took place in 2022 fell in the early-
stage category, with a cumulative 
value of US$630 million. This 
suggests that deals in the US$50 
million+ category are not unique  
to the late stage, as startups are 
raising more capital / larger ticket 
sizes earlier in their funding lifecycle.Figure 9: Distribution of VC Deal Volume and Value by Ticket Size, 2022
The venture debt landscape was dominated by a small number of big-ticket 
deals. Although only 9% of venture debt deals reported in Africa in 2022 were 
over US$50 million in value, they drew 61% (i.e. US$800 million+) of the total 
value of venture debt deals for the year. Examples include the US$238 million off 
balance sheet facility for Kenyan solar home system provider d.light, as well as 
the US$150 million securitised bond for Africa’s most recent unicorn MNT Halan, 
both in June 2022.Venture Capital Venture DebtNot DisclosedUS$50mn+US$20-50mnUS$10-20mnUS$5-10mnUS$3-5mnUS$1-3mn<US$1mn
39%
61%27%
15%13%
12%9%
8%5%
2%5%
1%2%
1%
27%
2%2%
9%5%
9%6%
15%8%
19%8%
9%18%
10%27%
27%% share of Deal Volume, 2022 % share of Deal Value, 2022
15
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
3.2 Venture Capital Deal Activity by Ticket SizeThe median value of late-stage deals has seen more fluctuations in the last 
five years than the annual medians for seed and early-stage deals, with 
fairly large dips in 2020 and again in 2022. The timing of these depressions 
reflect pullbacks in late-stage funding that typically accompany periods of 
macroeconomic instability (notably the Covid-19 pandemic and the global 
macroeconomic downturn of 2022), given the size and capital intensity of 
late-stage funding rounds. 
Conversely, median deal values in the seed and early-stage categories have 
displayed steady, modest growth since 2020. At US$1.5 million and US$10.0 
million respectively, the median value of deals that took place at the seed 
and early stages last year were the highest the continent has seen to date. 
In particular, the median value of early-stage deals in Africa last year, which 
grew by 33% from 2021, rivals that of the Americas (US$8.4 million) and 
eclipses the global average (US$5 million) for the category (see Fig. 3b). The 
preceding paints an optimistic picture for the future of capital generation 
opportunities available to emerging entrepreneurs on the continent and 
illustrates the industry’s growing ability to compete on a global scale.
Figure 10: Annual Evolution Median Deal Size in Africa By Stage, 2014-
2022124.1 Venture Capital Deal Activity by Region
KEY FINDINGS: Geographic Focus
45.0
10.0
5.6
Seed Early Stage Late Stage Venture Debt020406080100
2018 2019 2016 2015 2017 2020 2022 20212.0
VC deals
VC dealsVC deals
VC dealsTotal reported value in 2022
Total reported value in 2022Total reported value in 2022
Total reported value in 2022NORTH AFRICA
SOUTHERN AFRICAEAST AFRICA
CENTRAL AFRICA178
120168
8US$1.1 bn
US$481 mnUS$899 mn
US$48 mn
VC deals Total reported value in 2022WEST AFRICA
235 US$843 mn
16
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
3.3 Median Value of Venture Capital Deals  
in Africa West Africa once again attracted the highest volume (30%) of VC deals in 
Africa in 2022, maintaining the top spot for the second consecutive year. 
While the region dominates in terms of the number of deals taking place, the 
value of funding raised by West African entrepreneurs lagged slightly behind 
other regions, namely North (21%) and East Africa (17%). The region saw a 
37% contraction in startup funding last year, but this is due to a few deals 
(namely the US$400 million Series C in Nigerian digital bank OPay and the 
US$200 million Series A in Senegalese mobile money platform Wave) in 2021 
that artificially / momentarily inflated the level of funding typically assumed 
by the region.
Further south, Southern Africa’s longstanding predominance between 2014 
and 2020 as the region which saw the most deal activity has since given way, 
coming in fourth place by both deal volume (15%) and value (9%) in 2022. 120 
deals with a cumulative value of US$481 million took place in the Southern 
African region last year, in a 6% YoY drop by volume and 28% drop by value 
compared to 2021. The region’s downfall can be attributed to the gradual 
wear and tear of South Africa’s economy in recent years. Unemployment 
stands at 35%, and South Africa is projected to see the highest jobless rate 
globally in 202313. Furthermore, GDP per capita in 2021 is lower than it stood 
a decade prior, and consumer inflation in the country hit its highest level 
in 13 years during 202214. South Africa’s grip on the venture ecosystem has 
loosened in the face of increased macroeconomic stability, competition, 
entrepreneurial innovation, and investment elsewhere on the continent, 
with the result being a drop in regional deal activity for Sothern Africa.
While multi-region deals typically account for a small proportion of VC deal 
volume each year, they routinely comprise the largest share of deal value, 
and 2022 was no exception. Multi-region deals commanded 10% of VC deal 
volume but a significant 36% of VC deal value in 2022, with 77 deals pulling in 
US$1.84 billion last year. While the proportion of deal value raised by startups 
with a multi-region geographic footprint decreased from 42% between 
2017 and 2021 to 36% in 2022, this doesn’t necessarily indicate a decline 
in investor interest. Rather, it accommodates the growth of North Africa, 
which ascended to second place by both volume and value in 2022. This Share of VC Deal Volume 2017 – 2021 Share of VC Deal Volume 2022
Deals: 20%  23%
Deals: 21%  21%North Africa
Deals: 26%  30%West Africa
Deals: 1%  1%Central Africa
Deals: 21%  15%Southern Africa
Deals: 11%  10%Multi-RegionEast Africalower share by deal value also reflects the growth of East Africa, which also 
had a particularly strong 2022. Notably, the share of funding commanded by 
East African entrepreneurs in 2022 increased by ten percentage points, in a 
significant 137% YoY increase by VC deal value. 
Figure 11: Share of VC Deal Volume in Africa, by Region, 2017 – 2021 vs 
2022
17
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Multi-region deals not only comprised the largest share of venture debt deal value, they also received the largest 
share by volume. East (25%) and West Africa (21%) were particular hubs for venture debt deal activity in 2022. This 
was driven by startups headquartered in Kenya and Uganda in the East, while startups headquartered in Nigeria, 
Senegal and Cote d’Ivoire led the charge of venture debt deal activity in the West.Figure 12: Share of VC Deal Value in Africa, by Region, 2017 – 2021 vs 2022 Figure 13: Share of Venture Debt Deal Volume and Value in Africa, by 
Region, 2022
Share of VC Deal Value 2017 – 2021 Share of VC Deal Value 2022
Deals: 11%  21%
Deals: 13%  17%North Africa
Deals: 23%  16%West Africa
Deals: <1%  1%Central Africa
Deals: 11%  9%Southern Africa
Deals: 42%  36%Multi-RegionEast AfricaShare of Venture Debt Volume Share of Venture Debt Value
Deals: 9%  13%
Deals: 25%  4%North Africa
Deals: 21%  18%West Africa
Deals: 2%  <1%Central Africa
Deals: 10%  6%Southern Africa
Deals: 33%  58%Multi-RegionEast Africa
18
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
When categorised from a country-specific level, Nigeria, Egypt, South Africa 
and Kenya remain the giants of Africa’s silicon savannah, coming in the top 
five by both deal volume and value. Africa’s largest economy and most 
populous country maintained its status as the most funded country in 2022, 
while Egypt (15%) rose in rank to second place, eclipsing South Africa which 
drew 14% of Africa’s VC deal volume last year. 
22%of the volume of VC deals in 2022 
went to startups headquartered in 
NigeriaThe presence of the United States (17%), the United Kingdom (6%) and the 
United Arab Emirates (4%) on the top ten list of early-stage investment 
destinations by VC deal value evidences the growing number of Africa 
focused, but not headquartered, startups in recent years. While these 
jurisdictions also have a large community of members of the African 
diaspora, African founders are choosing these jurisdictions because of 
their comparative ease of incorporation processes and friendly business 
environment, their proximity to capital-generation opportunities, and their 
robust intellectual property frameworks. 
Figure 14: Top 10 Investment Destinations* by VC Deal Volume, 2022 Figure 15: Top 10 Investment Destinations* by VC Deal Value, 2022
Nigeria 22%
Egypt 15%
South Africa 14%
Kenya 13%
United States 5%
Morocco 4%
Ghana 4%
Uganda 3%
Senegal 2%
Tunisia 2%United States 17%
Nigeria 15%
Kenya 13%
Egypt 13%
South Africa 10%
United Kingdom 6%
United Arab Emirates 4%
Ghana 4%
Seychelles 4%
Algeria 3%
* Investment destinations are categorised by the country HQ of recipient startups
19
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
4.2 Venture Capital Deal Activity by CountryFigure 16: Evolution of Country Ranking by Deal Volume, 2019-2022
4.3 North Africa 
Countries Spotlight
An interesting development in 
Africa’s venture ecosystem in 2022 
is the rise of North Africa, whose 
deal activity grew at a CAGR of 57% 
by volume and a CAGR of 120% 
by value between 2017 and 2022. 
More specifically, what is interesting 
to observe is the slow but steady 
gains made outside of Egypt that 
contributed to North Africa’s 
ascension in 2022. While Egypt is a 
longstanding rising star in the region, 
2022 saw the entry of both Morocco 
and Tunisia in the top 10 list of early-
stage investment destinations in 
Africa by deal volume, as well as the 
introduction of Algeria in the top 10 
list by value. Accordingly, this section 
profiles Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia 
– three countries that had some of 
the most pronounced YoY growth 
last year – and were consequently 
responsible for North Africa’s rising 
share of venture capital deal activity 
in 2022.2022 2021 2020 2019
1. Nigeria
2. Egypt
3. South Africa
4. Kenya
5. United States
6. Morocco
7. Ghana
8. Uganda
9. Senegal 9. Tunisia
10. United Kingdom
20
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
A dominant force in the North Africa region, Egypt continually attracts 
the largest share of venture capital deal activity in the region, comprising 
two thirds (66%) of North Africa’s regional total in 2022. Its economically 
advantageous location at the confluence of three continents has also 
positioned Egypt as a gateway for entry into North Africa from the wider 
MENA region. More recently, however, Egypt has also been making a name 
for itself on the continental stage, rising in rank from the margins of the Big 
4 to rival Nigeria and claim second place by both deal volume and value in 
2022. This is particularly significant considering no super-sized deal activity 
(deals over US$100 million) took place in Egypt last year. 
The three most active sectors in Egypt are Consumer Discretionary 
(25%), Industrials (16%) and Information Technology (15%), which 
collectively accounted for over half of deal flow channelled to the country 
between 2017 and 2022. Egypt’s diversified economy, sustained levels of 
consumer spending and large urban population has created a consumer-
oriented startup ecosystem. It is driven by e-commerce, supply chain 
logistics (a significant proportion of which is storage and shipping for 
these e-commerce platforms), and EdTech. However, 2022 specifically 
saw the rise of the Financials sector in Egypt which aggregated US$225 
million across 26 deals, 53% higher than the volume from the year before. 
The Financials sector closed Egypt’s top deal of the year, which was a 
US$50 million Series B round in Paymob , a digital payments enabler for 
merchants in May 2022. Other notable deals that took place in Egypt in 
2022 include the US$46 million Series B funding round in InstaBug , an 
app performance monitoring software company; the US$40 million pre-
Series B round in B2B e-commerce marketplace MaxAB  (which raised a 
US$55 million Series A round just last year); and the US$38 million Series 
A in Khazna , a financial super app providing technology-driven financial 
services to underserved consumers and micro-businesses in Egypt. Compared to its private equity industry, venture capital is a relatively niche 
subset of private capital in Morocco at present. Nevertheless, venture 
capital deal activity in Morocco has shown modest acceleration in recent 
years, with 2015 being a particular turning point. It marked the launch of 
the Innov Invest Fund , a US$50 million joint initiative by the World Bank and 
the Government of Morocco to plug early-stage funding gaps for startups, 
support entrepreneurial training and the development of incubators and 
acceleration activities by project developers15. Since then, a number of 
local capital allocators have emerged, including Wise Venture Capital (a 
subsidiary of Small Enterprise Assistance Funds founded in 2015 to invest 
in early-stage Moroccan businesses); Outlierz Ventures (a seed and Series 
A fund founded in 2017); UM6P Ventures (the investment arm Mohammed 
VI Polytechnic University founded in 2019 and focused on the (pre-)seed 
stage). More recently, in March 2022 the MAD1.1 billion (€100 million) Al 
Mada Venture Fund was launched by Morocco’s Al Mada Holding Group 
and in October 2022 EmergingTech Ventures, an early-stage venture capital 
fund was formed with a fully Moroccan management team. Reflecting the 
investment foci of these investors, Morocco’s venture landscape is heavily 
concentrated at the very early stages. 88% of venture capital deals in 
Morocco between 2017 and 2022 were at the seed stage, with only four 
Series A transactions taking place in that five-year period16. Seed stages 
are responsible for the surge in venture capital deal flow in the country, 
creating a robust long-term pipeline for early stage (Series A and B) stage 
rounds in the coming years.
The top sectors in Morocco are Information Technology (37%), Industrials 
(17%) and Consumer Discretionary (16%). Notable deals that took place 
in Morocco in 2022 include the US$4 million seed round in transport 
management software provider Freterium , the US$1 million seed round in 
Jobop , a digital staffing platform and the US$1 million Series A in Chari , an 
online marketplace and embedded finance platform.VC deals
YoY GrowthTotal reported 
value in 2022
Median Deal 
Value121
+23%  by volume,  +35%  by valueUS$654mn
US$1.7mn
EGYPT
 VC deals
YoY GrowthTotal reported 
value in 2022
Median Deal 
Value32
+68%  by volume,  +329%  by valueUS$126mn
US$0.35mn
MOROCCO
21
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.orgTunisia was the first African country to pass a Startup Act in 2018, 
a landmark legislation that has since been implemented or worked 
towards in 10 other countries across the continent17. The Startup Act 
aimed to position Tunisia as an innovative business hub for startups at 
the crossroads of the Mediterranean, Europe and Africa, and successfully 
jolted the startup ecosystem in Tunisia which previously saw only a 
handful of venture capital deal activity take place prior to 2019. 
Information Technology (34%), Consumer Discretionary (21%), and 
Industrials (14%) were Tunisia’s most active sectors for venture capital 
investment between 2017 and 2022. Innovation in Tunisia’s Information 
Technology sector has drawn international eyes to this small country in 
Africa’s Maghreb region, particularly in the fields of artificial intelligence 
(AI) and biotech. Startups headquartered in Tunisia innovating in this 
space that raised capital in 2022 include SmartBee, a remote beehive 
monitoring system using infrared technology to prevent excess bee 
mortality and optimize honey production, the only one of its kind in North 
Africa. Another example is Deepera.AI, a financial management platform 
for the stock market using AI. Startups founded by the Tunisian diaspora 
are equally adoptive of disruptive AI-enabled solutions. Initially founded 
in Tunisia but now headquartered in the United Kingdom, deep tech 
startup Instadeep was acquired by a German biotech company in early 
2023 in a deal with a long-term value of US$684 million18. The success 
of Instadeep, which delivers AI products and solutions for the enterprise 
sector, position Tunisia to become a leading deep tech hub in Africa and 
the Middle East19. So too does Expensya, an expense management SaaS 
startup and another Tunisian success story – now operational in over 90 
countries and serving almost 6,000 corporate businesses20.
Notable deals that took place in in Tunisia in 2022 include the US$8 
million Series A in EdTech startup GoMyCode ; the US$3 million seed 
round in Save Your Wardrobe , a female-founded digital wardrobe mobile 
app; and the US$1.3 million pre-Series A in energy management software 
developer Wattnow .VC deals
YoY GrowthTotal reported 
value in 2022
Median Deal 
Value17
+183%  by volume,  +486%  by valueUS$18.5mn
US$0.64mn
TUNISIA
5.1 Venture Capital Deal Activity by Sector
Financials (31%), Information Technology (15%) and Consumer Discretionary 
(15%) were the 3 most active sectors by volume for the third year running 
in 2022, with these three sectors collectively accounting for just under two 
thirds of the total number of venture capital deals struck on the continent 
last year. The dominance of these three sectors reflects Africa’s evolving 
demography and the changing nature of African consumerism. Not only 
are African entrepreneurs bringing new goods and services to market, but 
the innovative use of technology is also modernising the distribution and 
accessibility of these entities beyond the upper-middle class to Africa’s 
growing cohort of young, urban and connected workforce. Given that Africa’s 
economic growth prospects are linked to its accelerating urbanisation; a 
growing middle class with more discretionary income; and improvements in 
digital infrastructure deepening both internet and mobile penetration across 
the continent, the popularity of these three sectors amongst investors is 
likely to persist in the long term.
By deal value, Financials was the most-funded sector in Africa’s venture 
landscape, albeit to a more modest degree than in 2021 (when the sector 
drew a monumental 60% of the total deal value). Although historically a 
prominent sector for entrepreneurial activity and concomitant venture capital 
investment in Africa, the elevated deal volume in the Financials sector last 
year was due to the closing of several late-stage, super-sized deals (including 
the US$400 million Series C in OPay , the US$292 million Series E in Zepz and 
the US$170 million Series C in Flutterwave , to name a few). The 31% YoY 
contraction in funding channelled to the Financials sector in 2022 is therefore 
not an indication of declining investor interest, but rather of industry-course 
correction following an outlier year. Industrials claimed second place by deal 
value for the second consecutive year, while Information Technology came 
in third with a total US$873 million put to work in the sector (equivalent to 
13% of the aggregate deal value for 2022).
Financials  accounted for the largest share 
of VC deals by both volume ( 31% ) and 
value ( 42% ) in 2022.
22
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.orgSector FocusFINANCIALS21
A titan in Africa’s venture capital ecosystem, the Financials sector 
routinely attracts the bulk of deal volume and value on the continent. 
Early-stage companies offering Diversified or Consumer Financial 
Services routinely attract the majority of deal activity in the sector. 
However, deals in the Banking industry have shown significant 
acceleration in the last three years - rising from only 5 such deals in 
2020 to 43 in 2022. This is in line with the growth of digital-only banks 
(also referred to as neobanks) in Africa. At the close of 2021, a total of 21 
digital banks were active on the continent that together served more 
than 27 million customers – up from just 8 digital-only banks in 201722. 
Catering to the youth, the underbanked, low-income customers, and 
SMEs, the market opportunity for digital banks in Africa stands at 300 
million potential customers, but still remains largely untapped. Deal 
activity in the Banking industry in 2022 include the US$50 million Series 
B2 round in Moniepoint , the US$30 million Series A in Ghana’s Fido  as 
well as the US$15 million Series A in Nigerian digital bank Umba . VC deals VC deals
YoY Growth YoY GrowthCumulative value in 2022 Cumulative value in 2022
Median Deal Value Median Deal Value242 113
+17%  by volume +36%  by volumeUS$2.2bn US$819mn
US$3.0mn US$2.5mnINDUSTRIALS23
Following triple digit growth in 2021, Industrials was once again 
a rising sector in 2022. Responsible for 14% of the total volume 
and 16% of the total value of venture capital deals in Africa, it saw 
incremental YoY increases by both volume and value in 2022. It owes 
its increasing prominence in Africa’s venture landscape to a surge of 
deals in the Transportation and Commercial and Professional Services 
industries. An emerging vertical within Transportation is MobilityTech 
(companies that provide technologies and services that are disrupting 
the transportation, automotive and shipping industries). 56 unique 
Transportation startups received venture funding in 2022, most of 
which made use of software and internet-based solutions to provide 
mobility as a service, efficient supply chain transportation services, 
and last-mile delivery for e-commerce / FMCGs. An emerging vertical 
within the Commercial and Professional Services sub-industry is 
HRTech (companies developing software designed to improve human 
resource management, operations, and hiring processes), which 
displayed 183% YoY growth from 2021 by volume. Notable deals within 
the Industrials sector in 2022 include the US$150 million Series B round 
in Algerian ride-hailing startup Yassir , the US$10 million Series A in 
Nigerian human resource platform SamlessHR , and the US$4.8 million 
seed round in Kenyan e-logistics startup for trucks Amitruck .
23
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
5.2 Rising Sectors of InterestVC deals VC deals
YoY Growth YoY GrowthCumulative value in 2022 Cumulative value in 2022
Median Deal Value Median Deal Value42 18
+50%  by volume +125%  by volumeUS$50mn US$13.7mn
US$1.4mn US$0.6mnCONSUMER STAPLES24
The Consumer Staples sector encompasses essential products 
used by consumers, and includes producers of food, beverages, 
household and personal products. Unlike the ever-popular Consumer 
Discretionary sector, Consumer Staples has not historically received 
a large proportion of Africa’s venture capital deal activity, with more 
investments being poured at the two poles of the supply chain. On 
the raw material end of the chain, venture capital investors have 
backed startups advancing AgTech and yield-increasing agricultural 
and farm machinery. On the distributor end of the chain, venture 
capital has backed logistics startups facilitating the distribution 
and last-mile delivery of agricultural products and packaged foods. 
Given the capital and resource intensity of manufacturing and food 
or staples retailing, investments in Consumer Staples tend to be 
more private equity rather than venture capital backed. However, 
there has been a noticeable uptick in venture capital deal volumes in 
Consumer Staples in recent years, from only 6 deals in this category 
in 2017 to 42 such deals in 2022. With more multinational consumer-
packaged-goods companies expanding their geographical footprint 
to Africa in the last decade and shifts in consumer spending patterns 
as more Africans move up the income chain, the Consumer Staples 
sector is prime for private capital investment. Notable deals within 
the Consumer Staples sector last year include the US$5 million 
investment by Norfund into 260 Brands , a Zambian consumer goods 
manufacturer, the US$10 million Series A in Ghanaian cocoa farmer 
Koa Impact , and the US$3 million seed round in Madagascan organic 
vanilla producer Lafaza .REAL ESTATE
The number of Real Estate deals concluded in Africa’s venture capital 
ecosystem has shown incremental year-on-year development 
between 2019 and 2022. While the sector only accounts for 2% 
of the cumulative volume of deals recorded in Africa last year, it 
nevertheless remains a rising sector to watch. Deals in this sector 
are not in traditional multi-million dollar real estate development, 
but rather in the PropTech component of the real-estate sector. 
PropTech refers to the application of technology elements in real 
estate and encompasses more than online search platforms - it also 
includes disruptive technologies improving the efficiency of real 
estate management, digital tools for smart, sustainable building and 
hardware. Diverse PropTech companies spread across the continent 
such as Nigeria’s YALO Technologies , Egypt’s Nawy  and South 
Africa’s DigsConnect  all raised venture capital funding in the last year, 
signifying a small but growing interest by investors awakening to 
the sector’s potential. Deal sizes in this sector remain low, with the 
largest last year being the US$5 million seed round in Egyptian online 
real estate platform Nawy . However, deal volumes have been on an 
upward trend, growing at CAGR of 106% between 2019 and 2022. 
24
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Figure 17: Share of VC Deal Volume by Sector, 2014-2020 vs. 2021 vs. 2022 Figure 18: Share of VC Deal Value by Sector, 2014-2020 vs. 2021 vs. 2022
8% 4% 4%
2% 2% 1%
1% 1% <1%
1% <1% <1%23%31% 32%
16% 15% 16%
17% 15% 16%
13% 14% 13%
7% 7% 9%
6% 5% 4%Consumer Discretionary
IndustrialsFinancials
Information Technology
Real EstateHealth Care
EnergyCommunication Services
UtilitiesConsumer Staples
Materials6% 5% 5%2014-2020 2021 2022
1% 2% <1%
2% 1% 3%
<1% 0% <1%
0% 0% <1%27%42%60%
17% 16% 13%
10% 13% 6%
22%10% 7%
13% 10% 4%
3% 4% 2%Financials
Real EstateConsumer Discretionary
Health CareInformation TechnologyIndustrials
EnergyCommunication ServicesUtilities
Consumer StaplesMaterials5% 2% 5%2014-2020 2021 2022
Africa’s tech ecosystem continued to thrive in 2022, gaining international 
prominence in the global arena. 6 African tech-enabled startups were 
named on the World Economic Forum 2022 Technology Pioneers list, 
which highlights young and growing tech companies at the forefront of 
their industries around the world25. These include Kenya’s Access Afya  
(HealthTech), Pula Advisors  (InsurTech) and Sendy  (MobiltyTech); Nigeria’s 
Okra  (FinTech); Rwanda’s Ampersand  (CleanTech); and Tunisia’s HawKar 
(MobiltyTech) – joining notable alumni such as Airbnb, Google, Mozilla, 
Spotify and Twitter that have all been named on the list since its inception 
in 2000.
78%of VC deals in 2022 were in 
technology or technology-
enabled companies operating 
across a variety of sectors
25
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Figure 19: Annual Evolution of Deal Volume in Tech or Tech-Enabled Startups, 2018 – 2022
The international recognition of these startups also highlights the 
diverse use of disruptive technology in Africa’s early-stage ecosystem, 
which is being harnessed across a broad range of sectors. FinTech was, 
unsurprisingly, a dominant vertical amongst tech-enabled startups in 2022. 
Beyond the Financials sector, 2022 saw technological innovation applied 
to consumer-based sectors with the rise of e-commerce and EdTech. 2022 
saw a proliferation of startups offering practical yet innovative solutions to 
facilitate learning for Africa’s youth raise funding, ranging from platforms 
providing educational entertainment for children, to startups developing 
school management software, and founders leveraging chatbox platforms 
to enable cheaper, offline access to learning materials. There are now over 
150 active EdTech startups across 25 African countries26 bridging the gap in 
access to quality education, a significant proportion of which are less than 
three years old. Illustratively, the number of EdTech startups that raised 
funding increased by 25% in the last year, from 28 in 2021 to 35 in 2022. 
Notable EdTech deals that took place in 2022 include the US$8 million Series 
A in Tunisian startup GoMyCode  led by AfricInvest, as well as the US$6 million 
Series A in Kukua , a Kenyan educational entertainment company.2022 2021 2020 2019 2018
103
deals127
deals267
deals519
deals619
deals
Figure 20: Top Verticals Amongst Tech-Enabled Companies, 2022
Rank
EdtechE-CommerceFinTech
Health TechCleanTech
Supply Chain Tech1
2
3
3
4
525%
6%
4%
4%
3%
3%
26
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Financials (30%), Utilities (28%) and Industrials (15%) were the 3 most active 
sectors by volume in the venture debt category. Financials (driven by FinTech) 
and Utilities (driven by CleanTech) corner the venture debt market, capturing 
58% of deal volume and an overwhelming 85% of deal value. US$703 million 
across 20 venture debt deals were poured into the Financials sector. Notable 
deals include a €90 million loan to Senegalese mobile money platform Wave  
from a consortium of lenders including International Finance Corporation, 
FinnFund and Norfund as well as the US$30 million raised by Moove , a 
Nigerian mobility fintech company, in December 2022 from a debut sukuk 
issuance to fund its expansion into the United Arab Emirates. 
The Utilities sector saw several companies raise repeat debt rounds, with 5 
unique companies raising more than one round of debt funding in 2022. One 
such company is Bboxx , a CleanTech company that designs, manufactures, 
and distributes solar systems across sub-Saharan Africa. The company 
received a KES1.6 billion (US$15 million) local currency debt package from 
Kenya’s SBM Bank in February 2022 to finance affordable solar home systems 
for nearly half a million Kenyans; US$15 million by way of convertible loan 
notes from InfraCo Africa in May 2022 to enable market expansion across 
sub-Saharan Africa and a €11 million loan from Lion’s Head Global Partners in 
November 2022 to accelerate their clean electrification delivery in Togo. The 
preceding illustrates the utility of venture debt as a financing alternative and 
cash cushion for business development or market expansion. 3% 1%
1% <1%30%53%
28% 32%
15% 8%
7% 2%
6% 1%
5% <1%Financials
Real EstateConsumer DiscretionaryHealth Care
Information TechnologyIndustrialsUtilities
Consumer Staples
Materials5% 3%% Share of Deal Volume % Share of Deal ValueFigure 21: Share of Venture Debt Deal Volume and Value by Sector, 2022
Financials  accounted for the largest 
share of venture debt deals by both 
volume ( 30% ) and value ( 53% ) in 2022.
27
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
5.3 Venture Debt Deal Activity By SectorKEY FINDINGS: 
11 companies concluded deals with a value of US$100 million or more in 
2022, down from the 15 unique companies (across 16 super-sized deals) that 
managed the same feat in 2021. While this represents a decrease of 27% 
YoY, it nevertheless signifies the industry’s development when viewed with 
a long-term lens, considering that there were no super-sized venture capital 
deals reported in 2020, and only three reported in 2019. With the inclusion of 
venture debt, which raised US$650 million across four megadeals last year, 
2022 closed out with a total 15 super-sized deals.
Deals with a value of US$100 million or more in 2022 were spread across 
five sectors and 12 countries (by headquarters). Mirroring the wider sectoral 
distribution of venture capital deals in Africa in 2022, Financials (54%) was 
the most active sector by deal volume for super-sized deals, followed in joint 
second by Industrials, Information Technology and Utilities, with two super-
sized deals each. By deal value, however, Utilities was the second most 
funded sector, owing to the size of off-grid solar energy provider Sun King’s 
Series D round at US$260 million and the US$238 million off balance sheet 
facility for Kenyan solar home system provider d.light .Figure 22: Sectoral Distribution of Venture Super-Sized Deals, 202227
VENTURE CAPITAL
11
VENTURE DEBT
4
VENTURE DEAL VALUE
US$2.2 bn
unique companies raised super-sized  
venture capital deals in 2022unique companies raised super-sized  
venture debt deals in 202234% of total venture deal value, which amounts 
to US$2.2 billion, went to super-sized deals in 2022 
across both venture capital and venture debt
54% 52%
13% 11%
13% 9%
13%22%
7% 6%Financials
Industrials
Utilities% Share of Megadeal Volume % Share of Megadeal Value
Information Technology
Consumer Discretionary
28
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Super Sized DealsOf note, international investors 
are leading the charge for these 
large, late-stage deals. With 
the exception of MFS Africa 
whose US$100 million Series 
C2 round was led by Rwandese 
fund manager Admaius Capital 
Partners; MNT-Halan  whose 
US$150 million venture debt round 
was led by Egypt’s Commercial 
International Bank; and Interswitch 
whose US$110 million venture 
round was co-led by South 
African investment company 
Tana Africa Capital and emerging 
markets fund manager LeapFrog 
Investments, the other megadeals 
that took place in Africa in 2022 
were led by international PE and 
VC fund managers from North 
Africa, Europe and the Middle 
East.Figure 23: Selection of Publicly Disclosed Super-Sized Deals, 2022
Portfolio 
CompanyHQ Location Region 
(Operations in 
Africa)Date Funding Round Deal Amount  
(US$ mn)
Sun King United States Multi-Region Apr-22 Series D 260
Flutterwave United States Multi-Region Feb-22 Series D 250
d.light Kenya Multi-Region Jun-22 Venture Debt 238
Yassir Algeria North Africa Nov-22 Series B 150
KuCoin Seychelles East Africa May-22 Series B 150
MNT-Halan Egypt North Africa Jun-22 Venture Debt 150
Wasoko Kenya Multi-Region Apr-22 Series B 125
Interswitch Nigeria Multi-Region May-22 Series Unknown 110
Moove Africa Nigeria Multi-Region Mar-22 Series A2 105
Trukker United Arab 
EmiratesNorth Africa Feb-22 Series C 100
MFS Africa South Africa Multi-Region Jun-22 Series C2 100
InstaDeep United Kingdom Multi-Region Jan-22 Series B 100
29
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
7.1 Impact Focus
of VC deals in Africa in 2022 
saw participation from at least 
one impact investor28
Deal activity with participation from at least one impact investor fell 
significantly to 26% in 2022, down from 42% the year prior. Slightly more than 
one in every 10 (11%) of venture capital deals that took place in Africa last year 
were climate-related investments, which all saw participation from impact-
focused investors.  Examples of climate-related investments supporting the 
development of low-emissions energy solutions in 2022 include the US$330 
million Series D (across two tranches) round in pan-African solar energy 
producer Sun King , the US$50 million funding round in Togolese electric 
motorbike manufacturer M Auto  and the US$40 million Series C in GridX , a 
bespoke solar and renewable energy solutions developer based in Kenya.26%Figure 24: Share of VC deals in Africa with participation from at least one 
impact investor, 2014 – 2020 vs 2021 vs 2022
No Impact investor presence Impact investor presence2014-2020 2021 2022020406080100
42% 46%
58%74%
54%26%
30
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Impact & Diversity FocusWhen broken down by impact category, impact investors 
backed companies advancing financial inclusion, sustainable 
agriculture and clean energy solutions, as well as companies 
improving access to quality education and healthcare. Figure 25: Top 5 Impact Categories Amongst VC Deals with Impact Investor Presence
US$35 million Series 
D in Ghanaian health 
tech startup mPharma , 
with participation from 
Novastar Ventures  and 
Social Capital .
US$15 million seed round 
in generic pharmaceutical 
product manufacturer 
Africure  by BluePeak 
Private Capital .US$30 million pre-Series 
A round in Asaak , a 
Ugandan asset financing 
startup, with participation 
from Social Capital 
and End Poverty Make 
Trillions .
US$3 million seed round 
in ImaliPay , a financial 
services platform for 
Africa’s gig workers with 
participation from Change 
Com .US$12.9 million pre-
Series A round in 
Ghanaian AgTech 
startup Farmerline , 
co-led by FMO  and 
with participation 
from a consortium of 
Foundations.
US$10 million round 
in Komaza , a Kenyan 
innovative smallholder 
forestry platform, 
co-led by Sobrato 
Philanthropies .US$15.5 million round in 
renewable energy trader 
Africa GreenCo  and the 
US$3 million seed round 
in Solarise Africa  (a 
pan-African Energy-as-a-
Service company) by the 
Electrification Financing 
Initiative .
US$4.25 million Series A in 
Rising Academy Network , 
a network of schools 
in West Africa with 
participation from UBS 
Optimus Foundation , 
King Philanthropies  
and Dovetail Impact 
Foundation .
US$1.8 million seed round 
in Zeraki , a Kenyan EdTech 
startup led by Acumen 
Fund .Access to 
Quality Health 
CareAccess to 
Quality 
EducationClean 
Energy Sustainable 
Agriculture  
& ForestryFinancial 
Inclusion 
8%10%16% 16%17%
31
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Although the industry made modest strides towards diversifying gender 
representation in the recipients of venture capital, the funding gap between 
male and female founders in Africa remains significant. When categorised 
by gender, only 7% of the deals struck in 2022 were in companies founded 
by women. This is marginally lower than the 13% that went to female-led 
companies (companies with a female CEO) in 2022, which suggests that 
more women are leading rather than founding early-stage companies in 
Africa. Nevertheless, female presence at the founders table rises by nineteen 
percentage points when evaluating the proportion of deal volume allocated 
to diverse founding teams. Specifically, 26% of start-ups that received 
venture financing in 2022 were either entirely female founded, or counted 
at least one female in the founding cohort, raising a cumulative total of 
close to US$950 million. Comparatively, the 24% of start-ups that received 
venture financing in 2021 which fit into this category only managed to raise a 
cumulative US$150 million, indicating that the industry was not as favourable 
to female founders last year. 
26%of VC investments in Africa in 2022 
were in startups with a female 
founder or multiple founders, 
including at least one femaleFigure 26: Share of VC Deal Volume By Female-Led Startups In Africa, 2022
Figure 27: Share of VC Deal Volume by Female-Founded Startups in Africa, 
2022No Female CEO
Female CEO 
87% 13%
No Female 
founder
Female founderMultiple 
founders 
including at 
least one female
74% 19% 7%
32
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
7.2 Diversity FocusOn a more positive note, while the 
percentage share of gender diverse 
startups successfully raising venture 
capital in Africa only displays incremental 
changes year on year, the actual number 
of startups that count at least one woman 
in their founding cohort is on the rise. 
This suggests that, at least on real terms, 
more capital allocators on the ground 
are adopting a gendered lens to their 
investments. While this is a measure of 
the industry’s development with regards 
to diversity and inclusion, an immense 
amount of ground must be gained before 
reaching equal female representation 
amongst funded ventures. 
A selection of female-founded startups that raised VC funding in 2022 include: 
Portfolio Company Female Founder HQ Location Region 
(Operations)Date Funding Round Deal Amount  
(US$ mn)
Sabi Anu Adasolum Nigeria West Africa Apr-22 Series A 20
Pezesha Hilda Moraa Kenya Multi-Region Aug-22 Pre-Series A 11
Kukua Lucrezia Bisignani Kenya East Africa Jun-22 Series A 6
Lami Jihan Abass Kenya East Africa Aug-22 Seed 5.5
Powered by People Ella Peinovich Kenya East Africa Mar-22 Seed 52022 2021 2020
75
unique 
companies131
unique companies188
unique companies
33
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Female representation on the allocator / investor side of the transaction is just as anaemic as among the ranks of 
entrepreneurs. As of the close of 2021, 33% of all roles in private capital globally were filled by women, but this figure 
dropped significantly to just 20% at managing director or partner level29. The underrepresentation of women in 
senior leadership roles could be one reason for the slow trickle of venture capital to solely female founded startups, 
which only received 2% of venture inflows into Africa in 2022. This is slightly below the global average of 2.7% of 
venture capital dollars that went towards female founded companies in 201930. However, a new generation of female 
fund managers have emerged on the continent in the last five years, putting their money where their mouth is and 
leading the charge towards gender parity in the distribution of capital. Female-led private capital fund managers that 
announced a successful fundraise in 2022 include the final close of the US$20 million debut fund from Aruwa Capital 
Management, a Nigerian early-stage growth equity and gender-lens investment firm. Another example is the US$36 
million first close of the Janngo Capital Startup Fund, which has a mandate to invest 50% of its proceeds in companies 
founded, co founded, or benefiting women. A selection of female fund managers that cut checks / made venture 
capital investments in Africa in 2022 include: 
Investor Founder / Managing Partner No. of Reported Deals
FirstCheck Africa Eloho Omame
Odunayo Eweniyi7
Aruwa Capital Management Adesuwa Okunbo Rhodes 5
Alitheia IDF ‘Tokunboh Ishmael
Polo Leteka Radebe3
Women’s World Banking Ela Bhatt
Michaela Walsh
Esther Afua Ocloo2
WIC Capital Evelyne Dioh Simpa 1
Janngo Capital Fatoumata Bâ 1
34
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
SPOTLIGHT: FEMALE CAPITAL ALLOCATORSThe number of investors that took part in venture deals on the continent topped a thousand in 2022, across both 
venture capital and venture debt deals. The record 1087 unique investors that wrote checks for venture capital deals 
last year represents a 14% increase from 2021, which closed out the year with slightly less than 950 investors having 
been active on the continent. The magnification of actors investing and operating in the industry is an amalgamation 
of different push-factors, including: the increasing amount of entrepreneurial activity and startup creation happening 
in Africa, the unique ideation and innovative mass-market solutions being developed by these early-stage companies, 
and a growing global interest in African startups.
1179
investors participated in 
venture capital and venture 
debt deals in Africa in 2022
8.1 Investor Profile by Type 1087
investors31
investors61
investors
Venture Capital Dual Strategy Venture Debt
PE/VC Fund Managers (firms that have raised, or are currently raising, third-
party funds from institutional investors) were once again the most active 
investors by type in Africa in 2022, closely followed by PE/VC Investment 
Firms (firms that are not known to be investing through a fund structure, 
making mainly direct investments). The crossover and participation of PE 
investors adopting venture capital investment strategies carried forward into 
2022. For example, Helios Investment Partners announced the introduction 
of Helios Digital Ventures  in May 2022, targeting tech-enabled startups at 
the early-growth stage. An increasing number of African fund managers 
that traditionally focused on PE investments on the continent are now 
concurrently raising VC funds. The preceding join the likes of Verod-Kepple 
Africa ventures, formed in 2021 as a joint venture between a Japanese 
62%PE/VC Fund Managers and PE/VC 
Investment Firms were the most 
prominent investor types funding VC 
deals on the continent in 2022, jointly 
accounting for 62% of the year’s active 
investors 
35
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Investor Profileventure capital firm and a Nigerian private equity fund 
manager, and the partnership between AfricInvest and 
Cathay Innovation with their US$168 million Cathay 
AfricInvest Innovation Fund , which announced a final 
close at €110 million in July 2022.
Corporate Venture Capital (CVC)31 investors were the 
third most prominent investor type funding VC deals 
on the continent, with global corporations such as Visa, 
Mastercard, Yamaha and Shell (among several others) 
actively supporting new entrepreneurial ventures 
in Africa last year. They join CVC firms Accenture 
Ventures, Mobility54, Orange Digital Ventures and 
PayPal Ventures, which made their first foray into 
Africa’s venture capital industry in 2021 and made 
repeat investments on the continent last year. 
Finally, Financial Institutions accounted for 7% of 
venture capital investors active on the continent in 
2022. These investors are a broad cross-section of 
financial services operators including banks, trust 
companies, insurance companies and brokerage firms. 
An interesting trend in this category is the increasing 
number of FinTech startups, which themselves received 
VC funding earlier in their development lifecycle, 
that are beginning to finance other entrepreneurs 
emerging on the continent. South Africa’s Stitch , 
Nigeria’s PiggyVest , Egypt’s Fawry  and the pan-African 
platforms Finclusion Group , Flutterwave  and MFS 
Africa  are just some examples of VC-backed FinTech 
companies that were also capital allocators in 2022. 
The multiplicity of active venture capital investors 
on the continent – in what is becoming a melting pot 
of investor types – further evidences the increasing 
diversification of actors investing and operating in the 
industry year on year.Figure 28:  Investors Participating in Venture Deals in Africa By Category, 2022
Fund Manager 431
Investment Firm 313
Corporate Venture Firm 94
Financial Institution 86
Foundation & Non-Proﬁts 47
Accelerator / Incubator 46
Angel Group / Network 42
Asset Manager 29
Government Agency 26
Family Ofﬁce 20
Investment Holding Company 19
Sovereign Wealth Fund 5
International Investor Africa-Based Investor
36
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Foreign investors outnumbered domestic investors dealmaking on the 
continent in 2022, with Africa-based investors accounting for slightly less 
than a quarter of the total number of investors active in Africa last year. 
This is slightly higher but overall largely consistent with the ratio of local vs. 
international participation when extended over the full 2014-2022 timeframe, 
which stands at 1:4.
At 38%, North American investors once again represented the largest share 
of those that allocated capital to the continent in 2022. Investors based 
in Africa follow thereafter with 270 unique investors (23%) active in the 
ecosystem last year, closely followed by European investors (mostly from 
the United Kingdom, France and the Netherlands) which accounted for 22% 
of the investor profile for the year, by region.
Figure 29: Investors Participating in VC deals in Africa By Region, 2022
23%Africa-based investors comprised 
23% of the total number of 
investors active in Africa’s VC 
landscape in 2022Investors from the United States comprised 
the largest share of international investors 
active in Africa’s venture capital industry in 
2022, while South African claimed the largest 
share amongst African investors
Close to half of the international investors that took part in VC deals on the 
continent in 2022 were based in the United States. 436 unique American 
investors participated in Africa’s deal making activity in 2022, a 22% YoY 
increase from the 357 that were active in 2021. The United Kingdom comes 
second in the cohort of international investors deploying capital to African 
entrepreneurs last year, followed by investors from the United Arab Emirates, 
which typically concentrate their African portfolio in Arabic-speaking North 
Africa.
South Africa, Nigeria and Egypt continue to be the main sources of venture 
capital funding amongst African investors, featuring in the top five of the 
country-based breakdown of investor participation in 2022. These three 
countries accounted for a combined 15% share of the total number of 
investors that participated in VC deals on the continent in 2022, slightly 
lower than the proportion they commanded in 2021. In particular, Egypt saw 
the biggest YoY increase in the number of investors dealmaking amongst 
Africa’s Big 4 last year, rising from 32 unique Egyptian investors in 2021 to 47 
in 2022. This coincides with a strong year of VC fundraising in Egypt. Notably, 
Egyptian venture capital fund DisrupTech  reached a US$25.1 million second 
close, a US$85 million FinTech fund Nclude  by Global Ventures alongside 
three of Egypt’s state-owned banks was established, Algebra Ventures 
reached a US$100 million first close of its second Egypt-dedicated fund, and 
Endure Capital reached a first close of its new US$50 million fund focused on 
early-stage startups. <1%1%7%
9%
22%38%
23%AfricaNorth America
Europe
Asia-Paciﬁc
Middle East
Caribbean 
Latin America
37
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
8.2 Investor Profile by Location 
Figure 30: Top 10 Countries Where African Investors Are Based, 2022
Figure 31:  Top 10 Countries Where International Investors Are Based, 2022
United States 436France 34
The Netherlands 28North AmericaUnited Kingdom 99Europe
Saudi Arabia 28United Arab Emirates 43Middle East
Nigeria 60
Egypt 47South Africa 75
Mauritius 14
Morocco 9Kenya  29
Tunisia 7
Senegal 6
Ivory Coast 4
Madagascar 4Ghana 9Africa
Japan 29
Singapore 25China 32Asia
38
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Key Definitions:
Venture Capital: 
An investment practice within private equity featuring short-medium 
term direct equity or equity-linked investments in earlier-stage, younger 
companies that need funding and support to get an idea off the ground, 
develop a business model or launch into the market. This capital is often 
deployed to companies in a series of “rounds” of funding as pre-agreed 
milestones are met. 
For the purposes of this report, venture capital deal values include equity, 
mezzanine, and debt when the latter is part of a larger transaction that 
also involves equity. Therefore, companies that raise mixed (i.e. equity and 
debt) funding rounds are classified within the Venture Capital category. For 
example, the whole value of the US$6.5 million Series B round in Kenyan 
home furniture manufacturer MoKo Home + Living  (US$3.5 million equity 
and US$3 million debt) is taken as venture capital in this Report.
Venture Debt:
Loans offered to early-stage, high-growth companies with existing venture 
capital backing by venture debt providers (typically banks or private capital 
funds) to provide liquidity to a business for the period between equity 
funding rounds.
For the purposes of this report, venture debt deal values include convertible 
notes, mezzanine, private bonds, and direct lending when they occur in 
isolation. Companies that raise mixed (i.e. equity and debt) funding rounds 
are excluded, and only pure debt deals are classified within the Venture Debt 
category.
Impact Investor: 
Investors with an intentional desire to solve problems, address opportunities, 
and generate positive, measurable social and environmental impact alongside a financial return. Development Finance Institutions, Non-Profit 
Organisations and Foundations are also classified as impact investors.
PE/VC Fund Managers: 
Firms that have raised, or are currently raising, third-party funds from 
institutional investors.
PE/ VC Investment Firms: 
Firms that are not known to be investing through a fund structure, making 
mainly direct investments.
Investment Scope:
AVCA’s Venture Capital Database takes an investment stage approach to 
data collection. There is no minimum deal value threshold for data collection. 
Instead, our methodology tracks startups and early-stage companies that 
have raised seed, post-seed to late-stage financing only.
The following exclusions are applied to our methodology:
Pre-Seed Deals . The focus on seed+ stages is because seed funding is 
(often, but not always) the first official equity funding stage. Given that the 
most common sources of pre-seed funding are the founders themselves, 
angel or family networks, this stage is excluded from our analysis.
Deals from Accelerators and Incubators . Deals featuring accelerators 
or incubators have only been included when they were part of a larger 
consortium of investors that participated in the financing or funding round 
of a company.
Deals from Angel Investors.  Deals featuring angel investors have only 
been included where they were part of a larger consortium of investors that 
participated in the financing or funding round of a company.
Growth Equity.  Deals classified as growth equity are excluded from our 
methodology. AVCA Research classifies these transactions as private equity. 
39
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Research MethodologyAs such, these deals are included in AVCA’s African Private Capital Activity 
Repor t, not the Venture Capital in Africa Report . 
Crowdfunding . Deals where capital was sourced solely from crowdfunding 
platforms are excluded.
Grants, Mergers & Acquisitions, Competition  or Award  financing is also 
excluded.
Data Sources & Quality Controls:
AVCA Research collects data on a bi-annual basis from a range of public 
and private sources. Public sources include news outlets, company press 
releases and public platforms. Private sources include data obtained directly 
from fund managers, investors and founders as well as from subscription-
based platforms. The data from private sources are treated as confidential, 
and only reported in aggregate.
AVCA Research supplements these sources using desk-based research to 
ensure data completeness.  AVCA Research reviews all data obtained, queries 
any obvious errors, verifies the cut-off rules, and processes all necessary 
changes to historical data that have been reported by contributors. As such, 
AVCA cannot guarantee the ultimate accuracy of the data.
Geographic Scope:
This Report is by no means exhaustive but intends to be indicative of the 
overall venture landscape in Africa. To provide a holistic overview of the 
volume and value of venture financing being channelled to the continent, 
this report covers the following: 
1. Startups Headquartered In Africa.
2. Africa-Focused Startups.  We define this as early-stage companies 
headquartered outside of Africa, but whose primary business, operations 
and market is in Africa. An example of what this Report classifies as an 
Africa-focused startup is Flutterwave , a payments infrastructure provider connecting Africa to the global economy. Although incorporated in the 
United States, this company operates in Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana and South 
Africa, thus meeting our methodology as an Africa-focused startup.
3. Startups not headquartered in Africa or whose primary business, 
operations and market is not in Africa, but have raised capital to finance 
the company’s expansion or strengthen the company’s presence in 
Africa specifically . In these instances, the entire deal value is used.
Temporal Scope:
This Report covers deal activity in Africa’s venture capital industry between 
2014 and 2022. Deal dates are taken to be the date on which the deal is 
announced, unless otherwise specified.
Sector Classifications:
The classification of invested company by sector is based on the 2022 Global 
Industry Classification Standard Classifications (GICS) .
40
VENTURE CAPITAL IN AFRICA REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
ENDNOTES
1 CIO, 2023. Assessing the Impact of Layoffs On Africa’s IT Talent
2 Disrupt Africa, 2023. Jobs Created By Funded African Tech Startups Almost Doubled In 2022
3 VentureBurn, 2022. African Fintech Start-Up Yellow Raises $20m In Debt Financing
4 AVCA News Room, 2022. TLG,  Future Africa Launch $25m Venture Debt Fund Programme For African Startups  
5 2022 African Private Capital Activity Report
6  Bain and Co., 2023. Global Venture Capital Outlook: The Latest Trends
7  Calculations of global industry growth averages are obtained using data from the Crunchbase 2022 Global Funding Report . Calculations of Africa’s growth 
averages are based on AVCA Data. Please note the Oceania, Middle East and Africa regions are not  specifically broken down in the Crunchbase Report. 
Accordingly, if you add up the Americas, Asia and Europe regional totals, they will not  match the global total, which considers these other regions. 
8 Calculations of global venture capital median deal sizes are obtained using data from the KPMG Q4 2022 Venture Pulse – Global Trends  Report. Calculations 
of Africa’s median deal sizes are based on AVCA Data. For direct comparability between datasets, the median value for late stage deals in Africa only includes 
Series C and Series D transactions.
9 World Bank’s Entrepreneurship Survey and Database.
10 Adjacent referring to pre-Series A or pre-Series B rounds.
11 Please note the annual evolution of median deal values presented here exclude those in the “Series Unknown” category.
12 Please note the annual evolution of median deal values presented here exclude those in the “Series Unknown” category.
13 World Economic Forum, 2023. Unemployment Forecasts, by Country in 2023
14 Department of Statistics South Africa, 2023. 2022: A Rocky Road For Product Prices
15 World Bank, 2017. Developing Venture Capital for Young Startup Firms in Morocco
16 Excluding deals in the “Series Unknown” Category
17 Disrupt Africa, 2019. 10 More African Countries Are Working Towards Local Startup Acts
18 Disrupt Africa, 2023. Tunisia-Founded AI Startup Instadeep Acquired In $684m Deal
19 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2023. Legatum Center For Development & Entrepreneurship Blog
20 TechCabal, 2022. How this Tunisian startup won big in Europe
21 Please note that according to the GICS classification system, the Financials sector includes the following: Banks, Diversified Financials, and Insurance.
22 BPC Banking Technologies and Fincog, 2022. Digital Banking in sub-Saharan Africa
23 Please note that according to the GICS classification system, the Industrials sector includes the following: Capital Goods, Commercial and Professional 
Services, and Transportation.
24 Please note that according to the GICS classification system, the Consumer Staples sector includes the following: Food & Staples Retailing, Food, Beverage and 
Tobacco, and Household & Personal Products.
25 World Economic Forum, 2022. Meet the World Economic Forum’s Technology Pioneers of 2022
26 Startuplist Africa, 2022. EdTech Startups in Africa
27 This sector breakdown by volume and value covers both venture capital and venture debt super-sized deals.
28 This report draws on the Global Impact Investing Network’s definition of impact investing to define impact investors as: investors with an intentional desire to 
solve problems, address opportunities, and generate positive, measurable social and environmental impact alongside a financial return.
29 McKinsey & Company, 2022. The State Of Diversity In Global Private Markets: 2022
30 Center for Strategic and International Studies, 2022. Addressing the Gender Imbalance in Venture Capital and Entrepreneurship
31 The Corporate Venture Capital category includes venture capital arms / subsidiaries of corporate companies as well as individual companies making unique 
investments outside of a formal firm or fund structure. 
Championing Private Investment in Africa
The African Private Capital Association  is the pan-African 
industry body which promotes and enables private investment  
in Africa.
AVCA plays an important role as a champion and effective change 
agent for the industry, educating, equipping and connecting members 
and stakeholders with independent industry research, best practice 
training programmes and exceptional networking opportunities.
With a global and growing member base, AVCA members span private 
equity and venture capital firms, institutional investors, foundations 
and endowments, pension funds, international development 
finance institutions, professional service firms, academia, and other 
associations.
This diverse membership is united by a common purpose: to be part 
of the Africa growth story.
DISCLAIMER 
AVCA refers to the African Private Equity and Venture Capital Association Limited, a 
company limited by guarantee registered in the United Kingdom. AVCA is a pan-African 
industry body whose international members include private equity and venture capital 
firms, institutional investors, foundations, endowments, international development 
institutions and professional services firms. The views expressed in this publication 
do not necessarily reflect the views of AVCA’s board of directors, advisory council 
or members. This publication has been prepared on the basis of data sourced from 
AVCA’s database, which contains information from public sources and private equity 
firms that has not been independently verified by AVCA. The database is constantly 
updated, and as such historical and current data may change as new information 
becomes available. AVCA takes no responsibility for the accuracy or completeness 
of the information, projections or opinions included in this publication, and neither 
AVCA nor any of its members or related third parties shall be responsible for any loss 
whatsoever sustained by any person who relies on this publication. AVCA encourages 
personal and non-commercial use of this publication with proper acknowledgment of 
AVCA. Users are restricted from reselling, redistributing, or creating derivative works 
for commercial purposes without the express written consent of AVCA.E avca@avca-africa.org
W www.avca-africa.org
C www.avcaconference.com
T +44 (0)20 3874 7008Contact AVCA
37 North Row
3rd Floor
London W1K 6DH

Extracted from: 02177-avca-apca-report-2023_public-version.pdf
2022  
African Private Capital 
Activity Report
APRIL 2023
PUBLIC VERSIONKey Facts 3
2022: A Y ear in Review 4 
 
1. Investments 6
1.1 Private Capital Dealmaking Activity: A Global Comparison 6
1.2 Private Capital Dealmaking Activity in Africa 7
1.3 Private Capital Dealmaking by Asset Class 9 
1.4 Private Capital Dealmaking by Ticket Size 12 
1.5 Private Capital Dealmaking by Geography 13
1.6 Private Capital Dealmaking by Sector 17
1.7 Spotlight: Tech-enabled Companies 222. Exits 23
2.1 Private Capital Exits in Africa 23
2.2 Private Capital Exits by Sector 25
2.3 Private Capital Exits by Geography 26
2.4 Holding Periods 28
3. Fundraising 29
3.1 Private Capital Fundraising in Africa 29
3.2 Concentration of Capital 31
3.3 Origin of Fundraising  32
3.4 First-time Fund Managers  36
3.5 Sector Focus 37
3.6 Interim Closes 38
Research Methodology 40Table of Contents
2
AFRICAN PRIVATE CAPITAL ACTIVITY REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
U S$7.6 bn
US$2.0 bnwas invested across 626 
private capital deals
private capital exits were reported, 
setting  a record high 82Financials  was the most active 
sector by private capital deal 
volume (29%) and attracted the 
largest share of private capital 
deal value (32%)West Africa  attracted the 
largest proportion of private 
capital deal volume in Africa 
(31%), driven by Nigeria which 
was the most active country
Sales to trade buyers was the 
most active exit route (48%) 48%US$17 mn
US$17mn  was the average private 
capital deal size
US$3.4mn  was the median 
private capital deal size
6.6  yearsThe average holding 
period
DFIs  dominated private capital fundraising, 
accounting for 59% of the fundraising value
International capital contributed 86% to 
the fundraising valueTotal value of 
fundraising in AfricaINVESTMENTS EXITS FUNDRAISINGMARKET SIZE
 SECTOR FOCUS
 DEAL SIZE
 REGIONAL FOCUS 
EXITS 
FUNDRAISING
EXIT ROUTES 
FIRST TIME FUND MANAGERS
AVERAGE HOLDING PERIOD
INTERIM CLOSES
2022: Key Facts
US$0.3 bn US$1.7 bn
in final closes raised by first-time fund 
managersInterim fundraising reached US$1.7bn
3
AFRICAN PRIVATE CAPITAL ACTIVITY REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org1.1 Private Capital Dealmaking Activity: A Global Comparison
Figure 1: Annual percentage change of Private Capital Deal Value and Volume in 2022
Volume ValueYoY Change (2021 vs. 2022)Global Europe Latin
AmericaNorth
AmericaAsia Africa
-15%15%
-38%-6%
-26%-23%-28%-22%-12%-15%3%46%
Source: AVCA, PitchBook*, LAVCA
*Data on investments in North America, Europe, Asia, and globally have  
  been chosen to follow a methodology as similar as possible to this report.2022 presented numerous challenges for private 
capital fund managers globally. The global economic 
slowdown, which was exacerbated by several factors, 
including the Russia-Ukraine war and the resulting 
energy crisis, supply chain disruptions, along with 
rising inflation and the associated increase in interest 
rates, led to a contraction of economies, which 
subsequently resulted in a tough macroeconomic 
environment for investments worldwide. Global 
private capital investment activity experienced a 
decrease of 15% in volume and 26% in value of deals 
(Figure 1), due to a rapid slowdown of deal activity 
in the second half of the year as debt availability 
declined and economic uncertainty intensified. 
Some of the world’s major regions witnessed 
significant year-over-year decreases in private 
capital deal volume and value. In North America 
and Europe, two of the world’s most developed 
markets, the volume of investments experienced a 
28% and 12% decrease, whereas the value of deals 
declined by 23% and 22%, respectively. On the other 
hand, emerging markets presented a more nuanced 
picture. Specifically, Asia saw the largest drop in 
deal value (-38%), while its deal volume experienced 
a decrease of 15%. In Latin America, however, 
there was an increase of 15% in deal volume and a 
modest 6% decline in deal value. In this challenging 
environment, Africa remained resilient and recorded 
a remarkable 46% year-over-year increase in deal 
volume and a modest 3% growth in deal value. 
4
AFRICAN PRIVATE CAPITAL ACTIVITY REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
InvestmentsKEY FINDINGS 
626
U S$7.6 bndeals in 2022, the highest record for 
deal volume in Africa
total deal value in 2022, second highest 
record for deal value in Africa2022 was the highest year on record for deal volumes in Africa in the past 
10 years, surpassing the record levels achieved in 2021 and representing 
a 46% year-over-year increase. Riding off the back of the impressive deal 
volume records set in the second half of 2021, dealmaking activity in 2022 
got off to a positive start. An upsurge of investments in venture capital in 
Q1 lead the first half of the year to record the highest volume of deals in any 
corresponding half-year in the period 2012-2022. This level of deal making 
was sustained in the subsequent quarters, which also reported record 
levels despite the macroeconomic conditions that affected the second half 
of 2022. This resurgence was the result of a 24% year-over-year growth in 
the volume of private equity investments, and a 7.2x growth in private debt 
investments driven by investments in venture debt, which is becoming an 
important investment strategy in the private capital landscape in Africa. In 
2022, venture debt represented half of the total private debt deal volume. 
Figure 2: Total Volume of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Y ear Figure 3: Total Volume of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Y ear & Quarter
+46%
2018 2019 2016 2017 2014 2015 2012 2013 2020 2022 2021626
429
258
158189 186 178 181200 205233222 
Average 2012-2021
2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2021
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4201
147140138
Source: AVCA Source: AVCA
5
AFRICAN PRIVATE CAPITAL ACTIVITY REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
1.2 Private Capital Dealmaking Activity in AfricaThe total value of private capital investments in Africa remained resilient to 
the face of the economic uncertainty over the course of the year, closing 2022 
slightly above 2021 and pre-pandemic averages. Indeed, it was the second-
most active year of the last decade, with private capital firms reporting 
investments valued at US$7.6bn, representing a modest 3% increase from 
the record level in 2021. Investment activity in the first half of 2022 recorded 
US$4.6bn in deal value to become the most dynamic first half in the period 
2012-2022. In a shift from the trends that have been observed in the past 
decade, the first half of 2022 recorded higher deal values than the second 
half of the year, occasioned by an increase in deals with ticket size above 
US$100mn. On the other hand, investment values in the second half of the 
year were especially affected by the wind of panic and uncertainty around 
the global economic outlook, resulting in reduced ticket sizes.
+3%
2018 2019 2016 2017 2014 2015 2012 2013 2020 2022 20217.67.4
3.47.8
2.74.1
2.34.14.8
3.64.1US$4.4bn 
Average 2012-2021Figure 5: Total Value of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Y ear, US$bn
Source: AVCA2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2021
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q42.4
2.2
1.51.5Figure 6: Total Value of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Y ear & Quarter, 
US$bn
Source: AVCA
6
AFRICAN PRIVATE CAPITAL ACTIVITY REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Figure 11: Share of Volume of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Region, 
2016 – 2022Figure 12: Share of Value of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Region, 2016 
– 2022
2016-2020 
Deals: 18%  17%  18%Deals: 16%  15%  18%
North Africa
Deals: 23%  33%  31%West Africa
Deals: 2%  1%  1%Central Africa
Deals: 25%  21%  19%Southern Africa
Deals: 16%  12%  13%Multi-RegionEast Africa2021 2022 2016-2020 2021 2022
Value: 16%  10%  19%Value: 10%  3%  12%
North Africa
Value: 21%  24%  18%West Africa
Value: 5%  14%  1%Central Africa
Value: 16%  9%  13%Southern Africa
Value: 33%  40%  37%Multi-RegionEast Africa
Source: AVCA Source: AVCA
7
AFRICAN PRIVATE CAPITAL ACTIVITY REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
1.5 Private Capital Dealmaking by Geography1.6 Private Capital Dealmaking by Sector
KEY FINDINGS 
of investments were in 
technology or technology 
enabled companies Financials , Consumer 
Discretionary  and Industrials  
continue to attract the lion’s 
share of the total volume of 
private capital deals
Information Technology, 
Healthcare, Utilities sectors 
on the riseFinancials accounted for the largest share by both volume 
(29%)  and value (32%)  in 2022 
Utilities , driven by 
investments in renewables,  
claimed US$1.7bn in the total 
deal value, the second largest 
in 2022
68%US$1.7 bnPrivate capital investment activity showed significant increases in all 
sectors, with the exception of the Energy sector. The performance of the 
industry was more mitigated by deal value, as conversely almost all sectors 
recorded a decline in their total deal value, except for Utilities, Healthcare, 
Information Technology, Materials and Real Estate, reflecting lower average 
ticket size injected into assets. Overall, Financials, Consumer Discretionary 
and Industrials were the 3 most active sectors by volume in 2022, with these 
three sectors collectively accounting for just under 60% of the total number 
of private capital deals on the continent. By deal value, Financials was the 
most-funded sector in Africa’s private capital industry, echoing the trend in 
the venture capital landscape. In second and third place were the Utilities 
and Industrials sectors.
Figure 14: Total Volume of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Y ear & Sector 
Source: AVCA0100200300400500600700800
2018 2019 2016 2017 2020 2022 2021
Financials Consumer Discretionary Industrials Information Technology
Health Care Consumer Staples Utilities Communication Services
Real Estate Materials Energy4841
18092877652
8
AFRICAN PRIVATE CAPITAL ACTIVITY REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
2.1 Private Capital Exits in Africa
82
65%
Trade 
Salesprivate capital exits  were reported 
in Africa in 2022, setting a record 
high and representing a 2.3x YoY 
increase
All exit routes in Africa in 2022 reached 
historically high record levelsof the total number of exits 
reported in Africa took place in 
2022 H2
was the most active exit route 
accounting for 48% of all exits in 
2022Private capital exit activity in Africa soared to unprecedented levels in 2022. Specifically, 
the number of private capital exits reached an impressive 82 full exits, representing the 
highest number of exits ever recorded in a single year on the continent. This record-
breaking number of exits marks a 2.3x year-over-year growth, and an 86% increase when 
compared to the pre-pandemic average (44 from 2012 to 2019). Given the pervasive 
global macroeconomic uncertainty of 2022, which is only expected to worsen in the near 
to medium term, private capital fund managers in Africa may have been prompted to 
prioritize asset disposals in 2022. This was further exacerbated by the disruptions caused 
by the COVID-19 pandemic which had impelled fund managers to postpone their exit 
planning and timelines. 
Figure 1:  Total Volume of Private Capital Exits in Africa, by Exit Routes & Y ear
2018 2019 2016 2017 2014 2015 2012 2013 2020 2022 2021
Trade buyers PE and other ﬁnancial buyers MBOs or private sales
IPOs and Capital Markets Other82
353244 455250
46
40 39
34
Source: AVCA
9
AFRICAN PRIVATE CAPITAL ACTIVITY REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
Exits3.1 Private Capital Fundraising in Africa
KEY FINDINGS: 
2-year US$2.0 bnDecline in fundraising  mirrors 
extremely tough fundraising 
conditions globallyAverage length of 
time to fundraise for 
funds closed in 2022The total value of 
fundraising in Africa 
in 2022,  a decrease 
of 54% YoY
2022 proved to be a particularly challenging year for private 
capital fundraising globally. In this environment, Africa was 
no exception. The decline in the value of fundraising in 2022 
in Africa was mainly influenced by the global macroeconomic 
downturn and uncertainty. Several factors, including high 
inflation, rising interest rates, geopolitical uncertainty coupled 
with subdued economic prospects in developed markets, 
are likely to have discouraged many foreign investors from 
making long term commitments into other parts of the world 
including Africa. In this macroeconomic environment, which 
has created extremely challenging fundraising conditions 
for fund managers globally, it is also likely that several fund 
managers in 2022 chose to concentrate their efforts on 
dealmaking and exiting existing portfolio companies instead 
of raising capital under these unfavourable and turbulent 
times. Consequently, the dismal fundraising trend in 2022 in 
Africa comes as no surprise. -54%
2018 2019 2016 2017 2014 2015 2012 2013 2020 2022 20214.4
2.0
1.11.94.5
2.9
1.93.4
2.42.83.9
Source: AVCAFigure 2: Total Value of African Private Capital Fundraising by Y ear of final close, US$bn
10
AFRICAN PRIVATE CAPITAL ACTIVITY REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
FundraisingScope
AVCA’s African Private Capital Activity report presents the current state of 
the private capital in Africa and provides an overview of the latest trends of 
fundraisings, investments, and exits.
The report covers activity by private capital fund managers that have 
raised third-party funds from institutional investors and are active across 
the following alternative investments: venture capital, private equity, 
infrastructure, private debt including venture debt and real estate.
Data sources and quality controls
AVCA Research team collects data on a semi-annual basis directly from fund 
managers, press releases, and uses desk-based research to ensure data 
completeness. The AVCA research team reviews all data obtained, queries 
any obvious errors, verifies the cut-off rules, and processes all necessary 
changes to historical data that have been reported by contributors. Therefore, 
AVCA cannot guarantee the ultimate accuracy of the data.
Statistics explained
Market approach 
AVCA data and statistics are based on the “market approach”. The statistics 
are an aggregation of the figures according to the geographical destination 
of the capital, regardless of the location of the private capital fund. At 
the African level, this relates to fundraising for Africa, and investments in 
companies headquartered or with major operations in Africa, regardless of 
the location of the private capital fund.Fundraisings
AVCA data and statistics on fundraising only include final closes by the 
private capital fund. However, the report also provides an indication of 
interim closes that were reported during the year 2022. 
It is to be noted that, only funds that focus solely on Africa or have an 
allocation to Africa alongside a broader emerging markets investment 
mandate are included in the report. Funds with a global investment remit 
that invest in Africa are excluded.
Investments
Deals cover all investments made by private capital funds across venture 
capital, private equity, infrastructure, private debt and real estate. They 
include all deal types associated with these asset classes, namely seed, 
early-stage, later stage, growth capital, buyout, greenfield, brownfield, direct 
lending, distressed debt, mezzanine, venture debt. 
Deals value includes equity, mezzanine, junior & senior debt and significant 
co-investments (where available).
Exits
AVCA data and statistics on exits only include full exit by the private capital 
fund.
A single exit is regarded when private capital funds have invested and exited 
in the same company simultaneously.
11
AFRICAN PRIVATE CAPITAL ACTIVITY REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
2022 African Private Capital Activity MethodologySector
The classification of 
invested company by 
sector is based on the 
2018 Global Industry 
Classification Standard 
Classifications (GICS). 
A detailed breakdown 
is provided in following:• Automobile & 
components
• Consumer 
durables  
& apparel
• Consumer 
services
• Retailing
• Healthcare 
Providers 
Equipment & 
Services
• Pharmaceuticals, 
Biotechnology & 
Life Sciences • Food & Staples 
Retailing 
• Food, Beverage  
& Tobacco
• Household & 
Personal Products
• Capital Goods 
• Commercial & 
Professional 
Services
• Transportation• Banks
• Diversified 
Financials & 
Capital Markets
• Insurance
• Chemicals
• Construction 
Materials
• Metals & Mining
• Paper & Forest 
Products • Energy Equipment 
& Services
• Oil, Gas, 
Consumable Fuels• Software & IT 
Services
• Technological 
Hardware & 
Equipment
• Semiconductors & 
Equipment
• REITs - Equity Real 
Estate Investment 
Trusts
• Real Estate 
Management & 
Development • Electric utilities 
• Gas utilities 
• Multi-utilities
• Water utilities
• Independent Power 
& Renewable 
Electricity 
Producers • Telecommunication 
Services (including 
Wireless)
• Media & 
Entertainment Consumer 
Discretionary
HealthcareConsumer 
Staples
IndustrialsFinancials
Materials EnergyInformation 
Technology
Real Estate UtilitiesCommunication 
Services
Confidentiality
All data received is treated with the utmost confidentiality. Only AVCA research team has access to the underlying data and data is published in an aggregated 
form only.13
AFRICAN PRIVATE CAPITAL ACTIVITY REPORT © 2023 AVCA | April 2023 | www.avca-africa.org
1 - 5 May 2023
Four Seasons Hotel Cairo  
at Nile Plaza, Egypt
avcaconference.comChampioning Private Investment in Africa
The African Private Capital Association is the pan-African 
industry body which promotes and enables private investment  
in Africa.
AVCA plays an important role as a champion and effective change 
agent for the industry, educating, equipping and connecting members 
and stakeholders with independent industry research, best practice 
training programmes and exceptional networking opportunities.
With a global and growing member base, AVCA members span private 
equity and venture capital firms, institutional investors, foundations 
and endowments, pension funds, international development 
finance institutions, professional service firms, academia, and other 
associations.
This diverse membership is united by a common purpose: to be part 
of the Africa growth story.
DISCLAIMER 
AVCA refers to the African Private Equity and Venture Capital Association Limited, a 
company limited by guarantee registered in the United Kingdom. AVCA is a pan-African 
industry body whose international members include private equity and venture capital 
firms, institutional investors, foundations, endowments, international development 
institutions and professional services firms. The views expressed in this publication 
do not necessarily reflect the views of AVCA’s board of directors, advisory council 
or members. This publication has been prepared on the basis of data sourced from 
AVCA’s database, which contains information from public sources and private equity 
firms that has not been independently verified by AVCA. The database is constantly 
updated, and as such historical and current data may change as new information 
becomes available. AVCA takes no responsibility for the accuracy or completeness 
of the information, projections or opinions included in this publication, and neither 
AVCA nor any of its members or related third parties shall be responsible for any loss 
whatsoever sustained by any person who relies on this publication. AVCA encourages 
personal and non-commercial use of this publication with proper acknowledgment of 
AVCA. Users are restricted from reselling, redistributing, or creating derivative works 
for commercial purposes without the express written consent of AVCA.E avca@avca-africa.org
W www.avca-africa.org
C www.avcaconference.com
T +44 (0)20 3874 7008Contact AVCA
37 North Row
3rd Floor
London W1K 6DH

Extracted from: avca23-02-vc-q1-q2-2023_3.pdf
Africa in the Global Context: Another Lean Y ear for Venture Capital
Q1-Q2
2023Venture Capital 
Activity in Africa
Global investments in venture capital reached US$144 billion in the first half 
of 2023, with double-digit negative growth in both Q1 and Q2 culminating in an overall 50% decline from the US$293 billion invested in 2022 H1
1. Familiar 
macroeconomic constraints including stubbornly high interest rates, European geopolitical instability and concerns related to the stability of the global banking system are partially attributable for this funding winter. However, record losses by industry titans including the US$5.5 billion investment loss in Q4’22 for SoftBank’s Vision Funds
2; a 33% mark down of portfolio value for Tiger Global’s venture 
capital funds3; and the dissolution of Sequoia Capital (arguably the industry’s 
biggest global brand) into three independent regional entities in June 20234 have 
also rocked the boat and magnified turbulence in the VC market this year. After reaching a peak of close to US$187 million in Q4’21, global VC investment has fallen in each subsequent quarter to stand at US$65 billion in Q2 2023
5.How does venture capital in Africa fare against these changes in the global marketplace? Amidst  what was then the strongest half-year activity the continent had seen to date despite the already entrenched global macroeconomic downturn, the 2022 Mid-Year Venture Capital Activity Report questioned whether the 
industry was running on borrowed time. The other shoe has since dropped - the African venture ecosystem is no longer the last man standing. Finally falling prey to shifting market forces, venture investments in Africa fell by 43% YoY in 2023 H1. This is against a backdrop of relatively strong fundraising by African VC fund managers in 2022
6. VC investors thus appear to be adopting a cautious approach 
to capital deployment, given the significant degree of market uncertainty which 
show no signs of immediate resolution. 
Q1 2023 Q2 2023 H1 2023YoY Change (2022 vs. 2023)Global Europe Asia North
AmericaLatin
AmericaAfrica
-39%-20%-16%
-47%-25%
-44%-33%
-56%-53%-38%-23%
-40%-27%
-36% -35%
-51%
Q1 2023 Q2 2023 H1 2023YoY Change (2022 vs. 2023)Global Europe Asia North
AmericaLatin
AmericaAfrica
-52%-44%-36% -35%
-47% -46%-50%
-86% -85%-84%-66%-51%-43%
-50%-48% -49%Figure 1: Global Comparison of Y o Y Changes to VC Deal Volume, 2023 H1* Figure 2: Global Comparison of Y o Y Changes to VC Deal Value, 2023 H1* 
© 2023 AVCA  |  July 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Venture Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 2023 H1 IN REVIEW
A Winter, or a Plateau?
The first half of 2023 saw 263 VC deals take place in Africa’s venture ecosystem, 
allocating a cumulative US$2.1 billion of capital to 258 unique companies. This corresponds to a 40% decrease by both volume and value compared to the US$3.5 billion raised in 2022 H1. At slightly over US$1 billion raised each quarter, this contraction in startup funding is being referred to by some as a “funding winter” for African venture capital. Sensationalist headlines aside, channels of capital to African startups have undoubtedly tapered off since Q3’22, in a belated but anticipated knock-on effect of the global macroeconomic downturn. 
However, rather than a funding winter, the funding dips of Q1’23 and Q2’23 are 
better described as a funding plateau. When evaluated against the historical average for the period between 2017-2022, industry activity in Africa’s venture capital ecosystem in 2023 compares favourably. 
A long-term lens is therefore necessary to temper overly pessimistic concerns 
of what may appear at first glance to be a nosedive in deal activity, particularly as the ecosystem comes down from a two-year trend of triple digit acceleration. In contrast to the capital free-for-all of 2021 H2 into 2022 H1, VC investors are applying a more judicious approach to investment - but are still actively allocating capital to startups with strong fundamentals. 
Investors Retreat from Super-Sized Deals 
VC investors shied away from big-ticket funding rounds in the first six months of 2023. 5 super-sized deals raising just over US$1 billion took place in 2023 H1, falling from 9 such deals that brought US$1.3 billion to the industry in the same period in 2022. Although the number of startups concluding deals with a value of US$100 million or more fell in 2023 H1, the proportion of overall funding assumed by these large, high profile funding rounds in each quarter remained largely consistent with the historical average. 
Of note, while super-sized deals routinely comprise both equity and debt, 
venture debt is assuming a larger component and consequently playing a more prominent role in these funding rounds. 3 of the continent’s 5 megadeals in 2023 H1 raised a substantial amount of debt financing as part of the investment round. Over US$200 million of Kenyan asset financing platform M-Kopa’s fundraise was 
sustainability-linked debt financing
7, South African car subscription startup Planet 
42’s fundraise included a US$75 million credit facility8, while Egyptian FinTech 
unicorn MNT-Halan raised US$140 million through two securitized bond issuances 
to complement their US$260 million equity raise.
Double Digit Y o Y and QoQ Declines at Every Investment Stage
Although most acute at the late stage, every investment stage saw significant 
contractions by both volume and value in 2023 H1. On the early stages of the 
venture capital continuum, seed-stage deals assumed the largest proportion of venture capital deal activity in Africa in both Q1’23 and Q2’23
9. While this is a 
recurrent trend in Africa’s venture ecosystem, seed-stage deals accounted for a colossal 71% and 72% of venture deal flow to startups on the continent in the first two quarters of 2023, respectively
10. Nevertheless, deal counts in this 
category fell by 55% from 2022 H1, debunking to some extent early predictions that seed rounds would remain unaffected in 2023. These initial predictions were based on the premise that the smaller ticket sizes characteristic of seed-stage deals would lend this investment stage a higher degree of insulation from global 
macroeconomic headwinds.  
The anomalous dominance of seed-stage deals is in part due to the virtual absence 
of late-stage deals on the continent in 2023 H1. Just 2 late-stage deals took place in Q1’23 while 3 occurred in Q2’23, accounting for a cumulative US$0.5 billion of venture capital. Given the significant market uncertainty in developed markets, the fall of the later stages comes as no surprise as global VC investors (which disproportionately lead the charge for these large, late-stage deals) continued to pull back from mega rounds. Nevertheless, even with this slowdown in late-stage funding, a number of high-profile deals took place in 2023 H1. Examples include the US$77.8 million pre-Series C round in South African digital bank TymeBank and the 
US$330 million Series F in drone designer and manufacturer Zipline.
© 2023 AVCA  |  July 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Venture Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 West Africa Leads by Volume; Multi-Region Leads by Value
West Africa attracted the highest overall volume of VC Deals in Africa in 2023 H1, 
closing out Q1’23 with 35 deals and Q2’23 with 33 deals executed (equivalent to 22% and 31%, respectively). West Africa only narrowly assumes the top spot in 2023 H1, with East Africa vying for close second after particularly strong dealmaking activity in Q1’23. Additionally, while both regions dominated in terms of the number of deals taking place, the value of funding raised by these bi-coastal entrepreneurs in 2023 H1 lagged slightly behind other regions, namely Southern (19%) and North Africa (18%). 
While startups with a multi-region geographic footprint typically account for a 
small proportion of VC deal volume each year, they routinely comprise the largest share of deal value, and 2023 H1 was no exception. This trend is particularly visible in Q2’23, which saw multi-region deals command just 7% of VC deal volume in Africa, but a significant 60% of deal value between April and June 2023. These include the US$14 million Series B for solar energy and digital devices asset financier Yellow Africa, as well as the two megadeal rounds in Zipline and M-Kopa, 
respectively. 
FinTech and Neo-Banks Bolster Financials, Whilst CleanTech 
Shines a Light on Utilities
FinTech continued to drive deal activity on the continent in 2023 H1, standing 
once again as the most dominant vertical amongst tech-enabled startups that successfully received funding. By extension, the Financials sector showed resilience, largely maintaining historical averages in terms of the proportion of funding the sector attracted by both volume and value across both quarters. Several of the largest deals for the period can also be attributed to the Financials sector, including a US$35 million Series B round in South African digital lender Lulalend, a US$30 million pre-Series B funding round for Nigerian payment service provider Nomba, as well as three of the five super-sized deals the period saw, 
which account for a combined US$615 million.  CleanTech is making waves in the global venture capital landscape, tying with FinTech as the most popular vertical amongst the top 10 highest-funded startups internationally in Q1’23
11. CleanTech, Renewable Energy and Energy Storage have 
have garnered increasing interest and investment from European VC investors specifically, amidst the extended Russia-Ukraine war and concerns regarding both the availability and cost of energy in the last 18 months. The rising tide of CleanTech globally was also visible in Africa’s early-stage ecosystem, where CleanTech was the second most active vertical amongst African VC-backed technology or tech-enabled companies in 2023 H1. Whilst CleanTech is largely a sector-agnostic vertical, it is responsible for the modest increases in deal activity channelled to the Utilities sector in recent years. Although still considered an emerging area of investment, funding recipients leveraging technology to improve environmental sustainability include €19 million to Madagascan clean energy provider WeLight, as well as US$8 million Series A for Qotto, a solar kits provider with operations in 
Burkina Faso and Benin.
Business as Usual for Venture Debt
Venture Debt remained relatively unaffected in 2023 H1, with deals in both Q1’23 and Q2’23 equalling or coming close to the volumes and values recorded in the same periods the preceding year. Overall, 25 venture debt deals totalling just over US$0.4 billion took place in the first half of 2023, making use of a variety of instruments including direct lending, convertible loan notes, lines of credit (in both local and hard currency) and bond issuances.
While venture debt is being used with increasing frequency in Africa’s early-
stage ecosystem, it remains an emerging trend on the periphery rather than a key component of the African investment ecosystem at present. However, increased uptake of venture debt strategies is highly likely in the short-medium term, as founders seek to maintain growth through the present macroeconomic downturn. As access to liquidity becomes more challenging, growth stage startups may turn to venture debt as a financing alternative or cash cushion for business development and market expansion.
© 2023 AVCA  |  July 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Venture Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 Figure 4: Total Value (US$bn) of Venture Capital Deals in Africa, by Y ear & Quarter2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2021
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q42023105158
050100150200250
Q1 Average (’17-’22)
Q2 Average (’17-’22)89
83
2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2021
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q420231.01.1
00.51.01.52.0
Q1 & Q2 Average (’17-’22)0.6A Winter, Or A Plateau?
Figure 3: Total Volume of Venture Capital Deals in Africa, by Y ear & Quarter
© 2023 AVCA  |  July 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Venture Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 2019 2023 Q1 2023 Q2 2022 202128%50%
30%
22%29%Investors Retreat from Super-Sized Deals 
Figure 6: Selection of Publicly Disclosed Megadeals, 2023 H1
Portfolio Company HQ Location Region (Operations) Date Industry Group Deal Amount 
(US$ mn)
Zipline International United States Multi-Region Apr-23 Transportation 330
MNT-Halan Egypt North Africa Feb-23 Financial Services 260
M-Kopa Kenya Multi-Region May-23 Financial Services 255
TerraPay United Kingdom Multi-Region Mar-23 Financial Services 100
Planet42 South Africa Southern Africa Feb-23 Consumer Discretionary Distribution & Retail100Figure 5: Megadeal Contribution to Total Value of Venture Capital Deals in Africa, by Y ear & Quarter
12
© 2023 AVCA  |  July 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Venture Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 Double Digit Y o Y and QoQ Declines at Every Investment Stage 
2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2021
Seed Early Stage Late Stage Series Unknown Venture Debt2022 Q1 2022 Q2 2023 Q1 2023 Q2101114140319650853
260
209
173
115
2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2021
Seed Early Stage Late Stage Series Unknown Venture Debt2022 Q1 2022 Q2 2023 Q1 2023 Q20.30.71.5
1.15.26.5
2.1 2.2
1.2 1.3Figure 7: Annual Evolution of VC Deal Volume by Stage, 2017-2023 H1
Figure 8: Annual Evolution of VC Deal Value (US$bn) by Stage, 2017-2023 H1
© 2023 AVCA  |  July 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Venture Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 34.0
14.5
5.4
Seed Early Stage Late Stage Venture Debt Median 
(All Deals)2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2023 H1 20212.0
1.5020406080100
24.5
22.0
Seed Series A Series B Series C2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2023 H1 20217.0
1.5020406080100Figure 9: Annual Evolution of Median Deal Size by Stage, 2017-2023 H1 (US$bn) Figure 10: Annual Evolution of Median Deal Size by Series, 2017-2023 H1 (US$bn)
© 2023 AVCA  |  July 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Venture Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 Figure 11: Share of VC Deal Volume in Africa, by Region, 2017 – 2022 vs 2023 H1 Figure 12: Share of VC Deal Value in Africa, by Region, 2017 – 2022 vs 2023 H1
2023 Q2 2017 – 2022 2023 Q1
Deals: 21%  21%  20%Deals: 21%  25%  22%
North Africa
Deals: 28%  22%  31%West Africa
Deals: 1%  1%  –Central Africa
Deals: 19%  19%  20%Southern Africa
Deals: 10%  12%  7%Multi-RegionEast Africa2023 Q2 2017 – 2022 2023 Q1
Value: 15%  32%  5%North Africa
Value: 21%  9%  12%West Africa
Value: 1%  <1%  –Central Africa
Value: 10%  22%  16%Southern Africa
Value: 39%  19%  60%Multi-RegionValue: 14%  18%  7%East AfricaWest Africa Leads by Volume; Multi-Region Leads by Value 
© 2023 AVCA  |  July 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Venture Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 29% 26% 21%
16% 20% 19%
15% 15% 16%
14% 9%15%
8% 9% 9%
5% 6% 5%
5% 4% 4%
5% 4% 7%
2% 4% 2%
1% 3% 2%2017-2022 2023 Q1 2023 Q2 2017-2022 2023 Q1 2023 Q2
46% 46% 48%
16%34%
3%
2% 5% 1%4% 5% 4%
8%3%8%
<1% 2% 1%
10%2%15%
3% 2% 3%
9%1%17%
1% <1% <1%28% 1 24%
8% 3 8%
9% 4 8%6%29%
5%6
4%2%55%% share of VC 
Deal Volume (2017-22)% share of VC Deal Volume (2023 H1)
Rank Financials
Real EstateConsumerDiscretionary
Health CareInformationTechnology
Industrials
CommunicationServices
UtilitiesConsumerStaples
MaterialsFinancials
Real Estate
ConsumerDiscretionaryHealth Care
InformationTechnologyIndustrials
CommunicationServicesUtilitiesConsumerStaples
MaterialsFinTech
HealthTechCleanTech
EdTechE-Commerce
Supply ChainTechFinTech and Neo-Banks Bolster Financials, Whilst CleanTech Shines a Light on Utilities 
Figure 13: Share of VC Deal Volume by Sector, 2017-2022 vs. 2023 H1Figure 14: Share of VC Deal Value by Sector, 2017-2022 vs. 2023 H1Figure 15: Top Verticals Amongst Tech-Enabled Companies, 2017-2023 H1
© 2023 AVCA  |  July 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Venture Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 Figure 18: Evolution of Median Venture Debt Deal Value, 2022-2023 H1 (US$bn)2023 202215
10
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q42023 20220.20.3
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
2022 H1 5.5
2022 H2 5.8
2023 H1 5.4Business as Usual for Venture Debt 
Figure 16: Total Volume of Venture Debt Deals in Africa, by Y ear & Quarter Figure 17: Total Value of Venture Debt Deals in Africa, by Y ear & Quarter
© 2023 AVCA  |  July 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Venture Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 E avca@avca-africa.org
W www.avca-africa.org
C www.avcaconference.com
T +44 (0)20 3874 7008Contact AVCA
37 North Row
3rd Floor
London W1K 6DHChampioning Private Investment in AfricaEndnotes
*  Please not e data on venture capital activity in Europe for Q2’23 was unavailable at the time of 
publication, and is thus omitted from this chart.
1  Crunchbase, 2023. Crunchbase Q2 2023 Global Funding Report
2  Financial Times, 2023. Softbank’ s Vision Funds Post $5.5bn Loss 
3  Wall Street Journal, 2023. Tiger Global Writes Down Venture Funds’ Bets by 33% in 2022
4  F orbes, 2023. Sequoia Is Splitting Into Three VC Firms
5 Crunchbase, 2023. Crunchbase Q2 2023 Global Funding Report
6  A VCA, 2023. 2022 Venture Capital in Africa Report
7  M-K OPA, 2023. M-KOPA Raises over $250m in New Financing
8  T echCrunch, 2023. South African Car Subscription Service Planet42 Raises $100M Equity, Debt
9  Ex cluding deals in the “Series Unknown” Category
10  B y comparison, the historical average share of deals in this category between 2017-2022 is 55%
11  KPMG P rivate Enterprise, 2023. Venture Pulse Q1 2023
12  Please not e no super-sized venture capital deals took place in Africa prior to 2019, nor in 2020
The African Private Capital Association is the pan-African industry body 
which promotes and enables private investment in Africa.
AVCA plays an important role as a champion and effective change agent 
for the industry, educating, equipping and connecting members and stakeholders with independent industry research, best practice training programmes and exceptional networking opportunities.
With a global and growing member base, AVCA members span private 
equity and venture capital firms, institutional investors, foundations and endowments, pension funds, international development finance institutions, professional service firms, academia, and other associations.
This diverse membership is united by a common purpose: to be part of 
the Africa growth story.
Research Methodology
This report maintains the same 
methodology used in the full 
year Venture Capital in Africa 
series. A detailed overview of the Research Methodology used can be accessed here , on 
pages 39-40.


Extracted from: avca23-03-apca-q1-q2-2023_4.pdf
Private Capital 
Activity in AfricaQ1-Q2
2023
A MID- YEAR IN REVIEW
A Lacklustre First Half 
Despite earlier reports of projected economic growth in Africa, the first half of 
2023 continued to mirror the macroeconomic trends of the second half of 2022, characterised by depressed GDP growth rates, high inflation, and high interest rates across the continent. Investors in Africa continued to bear the brunt of persistent inflation which climbed to an average of 15.5% in H1 2023
1, while simultaneously 
experiencing a depreciation of local currencies and foreign exchange pressures. The net effect of the continued slowdown in the global economy reflected with a heavier impact on the private capital activity in Africa. 
It therefore comes as no surprise that deal volumes and values in H1 2023 
remained modest, recording US$2.2bn across 196 investments. This amounted to a 44% decrease in deal volumes and a 52% decrease in deal values when compared to H1 2022. While significant, the decline mirrored trends in private capital globally, where global deal volume and value declined by 44% and 43% respectively.  Despite these downward trends, there is a silver lining, as H1 2023 saw the second-highest deal volume and the third-highest investment values on record in the last 7 years, demonstrating the resilience of the private capital industry in Africa. 
The decline experienced in H1 2023 in Africa was largely driven by supressed deal 
activity in venture capital. Though it remained the most dominant asset class by market share in Africa, investors directed less capital and made fewer investments 
1  https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/PCPIPCH@WEO/SSAtowards venture capital during the first half of the year, resulting in both deal volume and value declining by more than 40% compared to the corresponding period last year. This was driven by the decline of venture capital megadeals (investments totalling US$100mn+), which suffered a substantial 3.5x and 3x drop in deal volume and value compared to the first half of 2022 respectively. It is however worth noting that all other asset classes were also affected by the decline of larger ticket sizes as investors treaded with caution triggered by global liquidity and cash flow concerns, choosing instead to focus on allocating smaller ticket sizes across the board. 
Despite the tremors of muted deal activity being felt across all the asset classes, 
private debt remained resilient, emerging as a popular investment strategy.  Following peak activity in 2022, the asset class managed to attract similar deal volumes (20) in H1 2023 as it did in the corresponding period in 2022, highlighting the continuing demand for private debt as an attractive alternative source of funding in an environment plagued by rising interest rates and tightening lending standards by banks. Reflecting the trends across other asset classes, private debt deal values however suffered a decline in H1 2023 as the riskier investment climate pushed private debt funds to reduce their position size. Notably was the absence of large private debt investments in Q2 2023, as opposed to the corresponding period last year, which had a negative impact on the overall deal value recorded in H1 2023. 
© 2023 AVCA  |  August 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Private Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 Fundraising Resilient as Investors Exhibit Increasing Interest in 
Private Debt Funds
In the first half of 2023, fund managers continued to navigate fundraising under 
the weight of a tough macroeconomic environment. Despite the bleak economic situation on the continent, investors did not shy away from making commitments into funds seeking to invest across various strategies. Fund managers raised a total of US$1bn in final closes in H1 2023, attaining similar final close values recorded in H1 2022. In addition, another US$1.3bn was raised in interim closes, already accounting for a significant 76% of the total interim close values reported for the entire year of 2022. Data from H1 2023 therefore suggests that despite the current negative outlook on the industry, fundraising activity in Africa is showing signs of stability and is headed towards achieving the same levels of activity seen in 2022, without excluding the possibility of a modest growth. 
In H1 2023, fundraising strategies took an interesting turn. Specifically, investors 
exhibited increasing interest in private debt funds as the demand for private debt in Africa continues to grow. While the number of private debt funds in the market remain relatively low, these funds nevertheless attracted substantially more capital in H1 2023 than in previous years. In H1 2023 alone, private debt funds raised US$0.4bn, a significant 3x the total value raised in the entire year of 2022. Private debt funds additionally attracted US$0.3bn in interim closes in H1 2023, in contrast to the US$0.02bn raised in the entire year of 2022. 
Southern Africa Remains Resilient Amidst Regional Decline
Southern Africa demonstrated resilience during the first half of 2023, weathering the storm with a comparatively milder 9% decline in deal value, in contrast to the over 50% decline experienced across all other regions. East Africa on the other hand suffered the largest decline in deal value (76%) in H1 2023, a shadow of the spectacular performance recorded in H1 2022. Similar trends were observed in West Africa, where deal value declined by 59%.
The value of investments in Southern Africa remained relatively stable across all 
asset classes, even recording a 10% increase in venture capital investments. The modest decline in the value of investments in the region in H1 2023 was mainly driven by the outstanding performance of the Utilities sector, which recorded the highest deal volume and value in any first half in the last 7 years. This was largely due to an increase in renewable energy investments in South Africa, coming in at a time when the government is implementing the 2023 – 2027 Just Energy Transition Investment Plan aimed at mobilizing resources to support the transition towards a low carbon economy and increase energy security in South Africa.
Financials Sector Maintains Dominance 
The Financials sector continued its reign as the most popular investment sector in Africa, receiving the largest share of deal volume (20%) and deal value (31%) in H1 2023. Despite the continued dominance, the Financials sector was however not immune to the investment scourge which affected the first half of the year, as both deal volume and value declined by 63% in H1 2023 when compared to H1 2022. 
A deep dive into the sector reveals an unsurprising trend of venture capital deals 
driving investment activity within the sector, with Fintech companies receiving 75% of the total volume of investments in Financials in H1 2023. Traditional financial institutions such as banks, investment and insurance companies were however not left behind and accounted for the remaining 25% deal volume. 
While all other sectors experienced a decline of more than 50% in value, there 
was a 2.7x uptick in the value of investments in the Consumer Staples sector (which typically includes investments in food and beverages) and a 8.3x increase of investments in the Materials sector (which includes investments in chemicals) driven by two supersized investments in H1 2023. 
Exit Activity Muted
In contrast to the impressive exit performance recorded in 2022, exit activity remained muted with 17 exits reported in H1 2023 in comparison to 29 exits reported in H1 2022. The downward trends in exit activity across Africa in 2023 H1 mirror the challenges that fund managers face on a global scale when seeking to exit their portfolio companies amidst the current macroeconomic backdrop, necessitating longer asset holding periods. 
© 2023 AVCA  |  August 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Private Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 Navigating H2 2023: Trends to Watch 
As the curtain falls on H1 2023, it is evident that the private capital activity thus far 
remains far from favourable, particularly coming off the spectacular performance recorded in 2022. However, these trends must be examined against the larger macroeconomic situation globally which informs investor choices in the region.  
Based on the trends highlighted in H1 2023 and the general undertone of caution 
in the global economic outlook for the rest of the year, global macroeconomic trends are anticipated to continue shaping the private capital landscape in the second half of this year. As inflationary pressures continue to persist across the globe, we can expect investors to continue erring on the side of caution by making investments of smaller ticket sizes as they maintain their focus on venture capital, an asset class with untapped potential in Africa. It can further be expected that private debt will continue to grow in popularity as an investment strategy, while the narrowing of global cash flows may lead fundraising levels in Africa to remain comparable to last year’s values, with a potential rebound to historical highs.
Overall, H2 2023 will likely be characterized by cautious optimism by fund 
managers as they continue to navigate the murky investment waters. However, the best-in-class fund managers will be adaptive and creative as they weather the uncertain investment landscape, directing greater focus on growth and value creation within their portfolio companies while simultaneously capturing opportunities aligned with the current market conditions.
© 2023 AVCA  |  August 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Private Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 Africa in The Global Context: Slowdown in Private Capital Investments Across All Regions
Volume ValueGlobal Europe Asia North
AmericaLatin
AmericaAfrica
-44%-43%-40%
-47%-43%-34%
-44%
-52%-46% -46%
-54%
-67%Figure 1: Percentage change of Private Capital Deal Volume and Value between H1 2022 and H1 2023
Source: AVCA, Pitchbook
© 2023 AVCA  |  August 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Private Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2021
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q420231.3
0.9
00.51.01.52.02.53.5
3.0Private Capital Investment Activity Slumps After a Strong Y ear  
Figure 2: Total Volume of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Y ear and Quarter
Figure 3: Total Value of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Y ear and Quarter, US$bn2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2021
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4202370126
050100150200250
Source: AVCA
Source: AVCA
© 2023 AVCA  |  August 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Private Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2021 2022 Q1 2022 Q2 2023 Q1 2023 Q20.5 0.60.60.34.8
3.67.67.4
3.44.1
2.4 2.2
0.91.3
Venture Capital Private Equity Infrastructure Private Debt Real EstatePrivate Debt Remains Resilient Amidst Drop in Venture Capital 
Figure 4: Total Volume of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Y ear & Asset class
Figure 5: Total Value of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Y ear & Asset class, US$bn2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2021 2022 Q1 2022 Q2 2023 Q1 2023 Q2864423314
6
20
Venture Capital Private Equity Infrastructure Private Debt Real Estate200 205626
429
258233200
147126
70
Source: AVCA
Source: AVCA
© 2023 AVCA  |  August 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Private Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 Investors Retreat from Larger Deal Size
Figure 6: Total Value of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Y ear & Ticket Size, US$bn
Average and Median Deal Sizes Maintain Stability 2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2021
<US$10mn US$10-49mn US$50-99mn US$100-250mn US$250mn+2022 Q1 2022 Q2 2023 Q1 2023 Q20.20.40.4
0.40.20.3
0.24.8
3.67.67.4
3.44.1
2.42.2
0.91.3
Source: AVCA
Figure 7: Evolution of Average and Median Deal Size in Africa, by Y ear, US$mn
Source: AVCA2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2021 2023 H105101520253035
16.8
3.5
Average Deal Size Median Deal Size
Southern Africa Remains Relatively Resilient Despite Sharp Decline Across Other Regions
Figure 8: Share of Volume of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Region, 2017 – 
2023 H1Figure 9: Share of Value of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Region, 2017 –  
2023 H1
2023 H1 Av. 2017-2021 2022
Deals: 19%  18%  18%Deals: 15%  18%  19%
North Africa
Deals: 26%  31%  27%West Africa
Deals: 1%  1%  1%Central Africa
Deals: 24%  19%  25%Southern Africa
Deals: 15%  13%  10%Multi-RegionEast Africa2023 H1 Av. 2017-2021 2022
Deals: 11%  19%  18%Deals: 7%  12%  6%
North Africa
Deals: 19%  18%  11%West Africa
Deals: 9%  1%  1%Central Africa
Deals: 15%  13%  29%Southern Africa
Deals: 39%  37%  35%Multi-RegionEast Africa
Source: AVCA Source: AVCA
© 2023 AVCA  |  August 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Private Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 23% 24%18%
12% 16% 15%
8% 12% 8%
15% 10% 15%
13% 10%18%
8% 10% 10%
9% 7% 8%
2% 7% 2%
6%3% 4%
3% 1% 2%
1% 0% 0%Av. 2017 -2022 2023 Q1 2023 Q2
Financials
Real EstateConsumer DiscretionaryHealth CareInformation Technology
Industrials
Communication ServicesUtilities
Consumer Staples
Materials
Energy24%36%
22%
6%22%
2%
4%17%
1%
18%10%21%
6% 9% 10%
6% 5%11%
17%1%16%
7% <1% 13%
9%<1% 3%
1% <1% 1%
2% 0% 0%Av. 2017 -2022 2023 Q1 2023 Q2
Financials
Real EstateConsumer DiscretionaryHealth Care
Information Technology
Industrials
Communication ServicesUtilitiesConsumer StaplesMaterials
EnergyFinancials Continue Dominance While Materials and Consumer Staples Show Fortitude
Figure 10: Total Volume of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Sector, 2017-  
2023 H1Figure 11: Total Value of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Sector, 2017-  
2023 H1
Source: AVCA Source: AVCA
© 2023 AVCA  |  August 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Private Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 FUNDRAISING
Fundraising on Track to Achieve 2022 Levels, While Private Debt Gains Momentum
Figure 1: Total Value of African Private Capital Fundraising, by Type of Closing & Y ear, US$bn
Source: AVCASource: AVCA
Figure 2: Total Value of African Private Capital Fundraising, by Fund Stage Focus & Y ear of Final close, US$bn2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2021 2023 H1
Interim closes Final closes1.01.3
2.01.7
4.42.2
1.12.43.91.6
2.82.5
2.42.5
2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 H1 2022 2021 2023 H1
Venture Capital Growth Capital Generalist Buyout Replacement Infrastructure Private Debt Real Estate0.40.4
0.21.0 1.02.04.4
1.13.9
2.8
2.4
© 2023 AVCA  |  August 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Private Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 EXITS
H1 2023 Experiences Dip in Exit Activity After Striking Y ear
Figure 1: Total Volume of Private Capital Exits in Africa, by Y ear and Quarter
Figure 2: Total Volume of Private Capital Exits in Africa, by Exit Routes & Y ear2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2021
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q42023710
2018 2019 2017 2020 2022 2021 2023 H1
MBOs or private sales IPOs and Capital Markets Trade buyers PE and other ﬁnancial buyers Other8
6282
173544
324552
Source: AVCASource: AVCA
© 2023 AVCA  |  August 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org Private Capital Activity in Africa Q1 & Q2 2023 E avca@avca-africa.org
W www.avca-africa.org
C www.avcaconference.com
T +44 (0)20 3874 7008Contact AVCA
37 North Row
3rd Floor
London W1K 6DHChampioning Private Investment in Africa
The African Private Capital Association is the pan-African industry body 
which promotes and enables private investment in Africa.
AVCA plays an important role as a champion and effective change agent 
for the industry, educating, equipping and connecting members and stakeholders with independent industry research, best practice training programmes and exceptional networking opportunities.
With a global and growing member base, AVCA members span private 
equity and venture capital firms, institutional investors, foundations and endowments, pension funds, international development finance institutions, professional service firms, academia, and other associations.
This diverse membership is united by a common purpose: to be part of 
the Africa growth story.
Research Methodology 
This report maintains the same methodology used in the full year AVCA African Private Capital Activity 
Report. A detailed overview of the Research Methodology used can be accessed here  on page 11.


Extracted from: avca23-04-kifc-payment-providers-report_4.pdf
Research 
PartnerSEPTEMBER 2023Unlocking the Potential of 
Digital Payments in Africa: 
A Comparative Analysis of Regulatory 
Sandboxes and Payment Service 
ProvidersTable of Contents
An Introduction to the Payments Industry  3 
in Africa 
Growth Drivers of Digital Payments in Africa 4
Challenges Facing Digital Payments in Africa 7
FinTech Regulatory Sandboxes in Africa:  9 
An Overview 
Regulation of FinTech Sandboxes in Africa 13
1) Regulatory Framework 13
2) Eligibility Criteria 13
3) Access & Application Criteria 15
4) Key Features 16
5) Benchmark Summary 17
Payment Service Providers in Africa: 19 
An Overview Regulation of Payment Service Providers 21  
in Africa 
1) Regulatory Framework 21
2) Licencing Framework 22
3) Permissible Activities 26
4) Benchmark Summary 27
The Practitioner Perspective  28
An Interview with Chipper Cash 28
An Interview with Centrika 31
The Policy Perspective 34
An Interview with the Monetary Authority of Singapore 34
Policy Recommendations 37
Creating a Framework for Responsible and Innovative  
FinTech Services: Recommendations for Regulatory Sandboxes 37
Creating a Framework for Responsible and Innovative  
FinTech Services: Recommendations for Payment Service  
Provider Licensing 39
2
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaThe environment within which African financial systems operate has undergone 
radical changes since the turn of the century. Once chronically on the fringes of the 
global arena for traditional finance, a deepening of financial systems can be observed 
in almost every country across the continent - bringing banking, insurance and credit 
services to more households and enterprises than ever before. The African Union’s 
Digital Transformation Strategy For Africa  recognises digital trade and financial 
services as critical sectors that will drive the continent’s digital transformation between 
2020 and 2030. Bringing about this transition are new players and new products, 
often enabled by new technologies, that are broadening access to financial services in 
Africa. In this environment, competition and innovation have come to dominate African 
financial systems, cutting across all facets of the payments industry including channels, 
methods and value chains to reach previously unbanked vestiges of the population. Technology has emerged as a silver bullet in Africa, enabling the continent to keep 
pace with the changing landscape of payments for goods and services globally. 
Africans are adopting electronic payments and emerging alternatives such as 
cryptocurrency and digital currencies as a complement to traditional cash-based 
payments. These shifts towards electronic payments and the surge of alternative 
conceptions of money has precipitated an influx of new investments and supportive 
regulatory changes that are redefining Africa’s payment landscape. Notably, the 
value of venture capital investments to FinTech companies in Africa has grown at a 
Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 60% between 2014 and 2022, climbing 
from US$30 million to 9 unique companies in 2014 to US$2.1 billion allocated to 200 
unique companies in 2022.An Introduction to the Payments Industry in Africa 
FIGURE 1: Volume and Value (US$bn) of FinTech Venture Capital 
Deals in Africa, 2014-2022FIGURE 2:  Contribution of FinTech Deals to Total Volume of Venture 
Capital Deals in Africa, 2014-2022
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 20220.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
Volume Value (US$ bn)1020 2025 282748191220
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 202214%21% 21%25% 25%
19%
15%29%
28%
Source: AVCA Source: AVCA
3
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaNonetheless, the majority of monetary transactions in Africa remain cash-based, with 
less than 10% of all payment transactions made via electronic or digital channels1. 
This is significantly below the number of electronic or digital payments made in 
Latin America, for example, which stands at 64%2, as well as the Middle East (30%)3. 
While cash is still King in Africa, there are a number of growth drivers fuelling the 
penetration of digital and mobile based payments, with the potential to drive both 
social and economic gains.
Growth Drivers of Digital Payments in 
Africa
Digital payments are changing the mode of everyday functions, including how 
Africans bank, shop, and do business. While there are several push factors for the 
growth in digital payments in Africa, there are four key drivers accelerating the shift 
to cashless economies on the continent.
A continuous growth in e-commerce  both globally and in Africa has 
supported the adoption of digital payment methods. Global e-commerce 
volumes increased by 25% between 2019 and 2020 and are further 
expected to display annual growth averaging 12-15% until 20252, thus 
driving innovation in and uptake of digital payments4. Digital commerce is also on an 
upward trajectory in Africa, revolutionising how individuals buy and behave online. 
Africa is anticipated to surpass half a billion e-commerce users with an e-commerce 
penetration rate of 40% by 2025, in what would be a 17% CAGR of online consumers 
for the market5. As in other parts of the world, the COVID-19 pandemic (discussed 
later in this chapter) magnified the growth of e-commerce and digital trade. A unique 
feature of e-commerce in Africa is the presence of small businesses leveraging social media platforms (such as Instagram, Facebook, and WhatsApp) to buy and sell 
products online. These informal social commerce models tap into Africa’s mobile-
driven digital market and reach a broader demographic than more conventional 
models such as direct sales on company websites, B2B and B2C e-commerce 
platforms, and direct-to-consumer platforms which are also present on the continent. 
The demand for convenient, sophisticated digital financial services in Africa will only 
grow as consumers gain trust in and perceive the time and cost benefits of online 
and mobile based digital trade, forming new digital habits.
The COVID-19 pandemic and resulting containment measures  accelerated 
the growth of digital payments in Africa, resulting in a consumer shift from 
cash to contactless digital payments. While this upward trend towards digital 
payments was not unique to Africa in the aftermath of the pandemic, its 
adoption on the continent in particular grew by leaps and bounds. For example, mobile-
money transaction volumes in Nigeria more than doubled from 377 million to around 
800 million in 2020 according to the Central Bank of Nigeria6, while data from South 
Africa shows a 40% growth in online commerce during lockdowns in 2020 and 20217. 
A recent study by the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa on the impact 
of COVID-19 on e-commerce in Africa highlights how consumers in Egypt, Nigeria, 
South Africa and Kenya flocked to the internet during the pandemic. In each of these 
countries, 40% of respondents reported being more likely to maintain or increase the 
levels of digital payment transactions they typically made before the pandemic8. 
Although the uptake of e-payments on the continent has gained momentum since 
2000, many African countries saw hitherto unprecedented growth in e-payments 
between 2020-2022.
Government led efforts to promote cashless payments are another 
growth driver of new digital payment systems across Africa. This has had 
the benefit of facilitating interoperability, plugging tax leakages, and 
ensuring the effective distribution of aid9. Furthermore, policy and 
regulatory changes in key markets have played an important role in driving digital 
payment growth in Africa in the last few years, with examples as follows:Africa is anticipated to surpass half 
a billion e-commerce users with 
an e-commerce penetration rate of 
40% by 2025
Following the rapid transformation of the national payments system driven by 
financial technology and digital innovation, in 2013 the Nigerian Central Bank 
reviewed, updated and extended their existing strategy (Vision 2020) to become the 
Payments System Vision 2025 . The 2025 iteration of this strategy placed particular 
emphasis on digitalising the country’s national payment system and also introduced 
the Cashless Nigeria Policy to promote the uptake of digital payments10.Nigeria
4
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaGhana
Rwanda
South AfricaIn 2020 the Ministry of Finance launched three policy initiatives including the Digital 
Financial Services Policy and the Cash-Lite Roadmap designed to deepen financial 
inclusion and accelerate the shift to digital payments in Ghana11. 
The National Bank of Rwanda launched the Twagiye Kashiresi  campaign in May 
2022 to accelerate the adoption and use of responsible digital payments to every 
household, as part of the wider Rwanda Payment System Strategy to achieve a 
Cashless Rwanda by 202412. 
In March 2023 The South African Reserve Bank launched payshap , South Africa’s 
first rapid payments programme, as part of the Bank’s wider bid to modernise the 
country’s payment system under the National Payment System Framework and 
Strategy: Vision 202513.The rapid adoption of mobile technology in Africa , amplified by a growing 
middle class in urban areas using mobile money to make purchases, has 
accelerated the number of mobile transactions14. According to data from 
the Global System for Mobile Communications (GSMA), sub-Saharan Africa 
has consistently assumed the largest volume and value of annual mobile money 
transactions globally since 2017. More recently, Africa contributed 68% (US$836.5 
billion) of the global value of mobile transactions in 2022 and was also the region 
with the biggest rise in adoption and active usage of mobile money between 2021 
and 202215. The proliferation of mobile money across multiple use-cases has 
established Africa as the world’s mobile money frontrunner. Successes in key 
markets on the continent has encouraged similar adoption in other low-and middle-
income countries, elevating mobile money from a niche offering to an important part 
of mainstream financial services.
FIGURE 3: Volume (millions) of Registered Mobile Money 
Accounts Globally, 2017-2022
Source: GSMA500100015002000
0
East Asia & Paciﬁc Europe & Central Asia Latin America & the Caribbean
Middle East & North Africa South Asia Sub-Saharan Africa2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Africa contributed 68%  (US$836.5 
billion) of the global value of mobile 
transactions in 2022
5
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaFIGURE 4: Value (US$bn) of Mobile Money Transactions Globally, 
2017-2022
Source: GSMA030060090012001500
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
East Asia & Paciﬁc Europe & Central Asia Latin America & the Caribbean
Middle East & North Africa South Asia Sub-Saharan AfricaFIGURE 5: Volume (billions) and Value (US$bn) of Mobile Money 
Transactions in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2017-2022
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 202201020304050
Volume Value (US$ bn)23 27456490698832
Source: GSMA
Africa was also the region with the biggest rise in adoption and active usage of mobile 
money between 2021 and 2022
6
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaFIGURE 6: Internet Penetration in Africa, 2021However, the impact of these growth drivers has not 
been uniform across the continent. Their effect on the 
development of sophisticated electronic systems will 
depend on each market’s infrastructure readiness, 
regulatory environment and consumer trust and 
sensitisation, which each serve as enablers of a 
seamless digital transition. The proceeding section 
highlights some of the challenges impeding the 
development, convenience and scalability of digital 
payments in Africa.
Challenges Facing 
Digital Payments in 
Africa
Connectivity and Digital Infrastructure are 
twin challenges affecting the growth of 
digital payments in Africa. Despite an 
increase in internet and mobile phone 
penetration across the continent, access to reliable 
internet remains limited and Africa lags behind every 
other region globally. An average 40% of Africans had 
access to the internet in 2022, well below the global 
average of 66%16. Internet penetration in Africa is 
significantly lower than the near-universal access in 
North America (95%); and stands at roughly half of the 
75% recorded in Latin America & the Caribbean, the 
second lowest region in the world (outside of Africa)17. 
This belies significant cross-country disparities, 
however, illustrated in Figure 4. Nevertheless, limited 
internet connectivity, coupled with high connectivity 
costs in some countries, make it more challenging for 
businesses to conduct online transactions and for 
customers to access digital payment solutions. 
Beyond affordability, inadequate digital and real-time 
payments infrastructure make it more challenging to 
deploy certain payment technologies such as NFC-
enabled devices or QR codes. The absence of the 
requisite infrastructure to support these alternative 
payment mechanisms necessitates the presence of 
cash in national payment systems.Source: United Nations International Telecommunication Union (ITU)88%
2%
7
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaSecondly, regulatory requirements for real-time and digital payments  in 
many African countries are complex and evolving. Regulatory uncertainties 
and a lack of comprehensive, appropriate, and enabling regulatory 
frameworks for payments (and FinTech more generally) are hindering the 
increased adoption of cashless forms of payment. Governments and central banks 
with a strong focus on open, competitive, and innovative payments ecosystems are 
proving to be successful in driving growth and expansion of their digital economies, 
as illustrated in the preceding section. However, an unsupportive or outdated 
regulatory environment can also slow the pace of change, including the ability of 
industry players to offer innovative payment solutions.
User confidence and the perceived utility of digital payments  by 
consumers and small businesses in Africa lags behind other parts of the 
world and is another bottleneck to its increased adoption. This lack of 
awareness and faith in digital payment methods appears to be most 
prevalent in rural regions. For example, a 2022 study of digital payments ecosystems 
in South African townships found that cash remains the payment option of choice in 
township communities, despite its higher risk profile18. Additionally, 33% of 
respondents in a study of rural participation in mobile and digital financial services in 
10 African countries cited a lack of trust / high-risk perception as their reason for not 
making use of mobile money technology19. This relative lack of confidence in the 
security of online payment methods, coupled with negative perceptions of formal 
financial services, has a significant impact on digital payment adoption and means 
cash still reigns supreme in peripheral regions of the continent.
High digital transaction costs are another challenge facing the 
competitiveness and convenience of cash alternatives in Africa. Given the 
relatively low average income per capita and purchasing power of most of Africa’s population, values of individual customer transactions are often lower than 
more developed economies. Processing costs per dollar for instant payments are 
therefore more expensive on behalf of the service provider. However, transaction 
costs are equally high on behalf of the customer, and can prove prohibitive. Notably, 
Africa’s mobile money landscape is dominated by the slab-based pricing model due 
to its perceived user-friendliness, where transactions within a predefined range are 
charged a flat transaction fee20. However, a compromise for this accessibility is its 
value, as the slab approach is also among the most expensive pricing models (on a 
percentage basis) for small value transactions, with fees ranging from 1-3% of the 
transaction value. These high digital transaction costs are amplified by stiff tariffs on 
digital transactions by governments, further affecting mass adoption. Examples 
include the 2% tax for local currency electronic transfers in Zimbabwe (which rises to 
4% for domestic foreign currency transactions), the 1.75% levy on mobile money 
transactions of GHS100 (US$16) or more in Ghana, and 0.2% tax on mobile money 
transactions in Cameroon, to name a few21.
Although not without its challenges, the growth and opportunities for digital payments 
in Africa are limitless. However, a supportive policy and regulatory frameworks are 
necessary to create an environment where the innovators improving the convenience 
and scalability of payment methods on the continent are able to nurture and develop 
their products, services and solutions. 
To that end, the next chapter of the report examines the legal and regulatory 
environment underpinning the metamorphosis of payment systems in Africa. 
Focusing on Egypt, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa, and the West 
African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), Section 2 provides a comparative 
analysis of the key features of regulatory sandboxes and payment service licenses 
in these jurisdictions.
8
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaFinTech Regulatory Sandboxes in Africa: An Overview
Key Definition:
Regulatory Sandbox
“A regulatory sandbox is a regulatory 
approach, typically summarized in 
writing and published, that allows live, 
time-bound testing of innovations 
under a regulator’s oversight. Novel 
financial products, technologies, and 
business models can be tested under a 
set of rules, supervision requirements, 
and appropriate safeguards.”
- United Nations Secretary-General’s 
Special Advocate for Inclusive 
Finance for Development*The current landscape of payments and financial services 
globally is virtually unrecognisable from what it was 
even twenty years ago. Advancements in technology 
(including biometric technologies, cloud computing, 
contactless technologies, digital identification, distributed 
ledger technologies and the internet of things) are being 
applied to payments, enabling the delivery of new 
products, services, and access modes22. Examples of 
new tech-enabled products include instant payments, 
digital currencies and stablecoins. Technology has not 
only enabled the diversification of product offering in the 
payments and financial services landscape, but it has also 
transformed how both traditional and emerging financial 
products are accessed with the introduction of electronic 
wallets, super apps and open banking interfaces. 
However, these new or emerging financial products, 
services, or delivery channels may not be fully compliant 
or compatible with existing regulatory requirements. One 
way governments and regulators are responding to the 
rapidly evolving landscape of financial technology and 
the shift towards an online, digital, and application-based 
financial ecosystem is by instituting regulatory sandboxes. 
Sandboxes allow regulators to gain insight into the 
advantages and risks of newly developing technologies, 
the results of which are used to inform evidence-based 
regulation23. Policymakers are therefore armed with 
the necessary information to adapt their regulatory environments and re-engineer internal structures or 
systems to foster innovation and cater for these market 
introductions. The world’s first regulatory sandbox was 
established in the United Kingdom by the Financial 
Conduct Authority in November 2015. Since then, over 70 
sandboxes across 57 jurisdictions around the world have 
emerged (as of November 2020) to stimulate innovation 
in financial markets and facilitate the entry of new players, 
according to a study by the World Bank24. 
Regulatory sandboxes have evolved from mechanisms 
for regulators to understand emerging technologies to 
increasingly sophisticated controlled environments for 
innovators (both incumbents and established) to live test 
products and services to determine the attractiveness 
of their business models to consumers, how a particular 
technology will operate and be received in the market, 
and what consumer protection safeguards may need to 
be built in before public release to the market. 
Figure 7 chronologises the advent of regulatory 
sandboxes in the African context, as more regulators 
across the continent recognise how digital technology 
has changed the way the financial service industry offers 
products and services to consumers, and therefore make 
the necessary steps to better understand, supervise and 
regulate the new services and providers reaching the 
marketplace.* UNSGSA, 2020. Briefing 
on Regulatory Sandboxes
9
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaFIGURE 7: Timeline of Regulatory Sandboxes in Africa
1 Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africa  MAY    Mozambique
1 sandbox
The Bank of Mozambique  launch a 
Sandbox Incubator in partnership with 
FSD Mozambique, targeting FinTech 
innovators advancing fi  nancial inclusion. 
The Sandbox Incubator was designed 
to foster a conducive environment that 
enables increased interaction between 
the Central Bank (as the regulator) and 
FinTech service providers, as well as 
opportunities for development, testing, 
and demonstration of products.  MAY    Sierra Leone
1 sandbox
The Bank of Sierra Leone launch a 
Regulatory Sandbox Pilot Program, 
supported by FSD Africa and UNCDF 
Mobile Money for the Poor. The three 
main objectives of the sandbox were to 
support evidence-based approaches to 
regulations, promote fi  nancial inclusion, 
and foster responsible innovation that 
benefi  ts consumers in Sierra Leone 
by improving the quality of access to 
fi  nancial products and services.The Capital Markets Authority 
of Kenya  launch a Regulatory 
Sandbox for the live testing 
of innovative capital markets 
related products, solutions and 
services with the potential to 
deepen and develop the capital 
market prior to launching into 
the mass market. The 12-month 
Sandbox is designed to facilitate 
innovation, promote market 
development, and enhance 
investor protection.The Central Bank of Egypt  launch 
its FinTech Regulatory Sandbox, 
recognising that keeping up with the 
dynamism of fi  nancial technology 
requires regulatory agility that 
balances ensuring fi  nancial stability 
and consumer protection with 
advancing benefi  cial innovation 
to serve the banking and fi  nancial 
sectors. In 2022 the Financial 
Regulatory Authority was also 
mandated to establish a regulatory 
sandbox for FinTech startups in the 
non-banking fi  nancial sector, which 
is still under development.  MARCH    Kenya
1 sandbox  MAY    Egypt
2 sandboxesThe Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) in collaboration 
with the Nigeria Inter-Bank Settlement System  
launch the Nigerian Industry Innovation Sandbox , 
the country’s fi  rst FinTech sandbox. The initiative 
was supported by ₦250 million in multi-year grants 
from VC Firm Flourish and Enhancing Financial 
Innovation and Access, a fi  nancial development 
organisation. Since then, two other FinTech 
regulatory sandboxes have emerged in Nigeria, 
one from the Securities and Exchange Commission 
(2021) and another from the CBN in partnership with 
Emtech (2023).
  DECEMBER    Nigeria
3 sandboxes  APRIL    Rwanda
4 sandboxesThe Mauritius Economic Development 
Board  announce the Regulatory Sandbox 
License, issuing guidelines for eligible 
companies shortly thereafter. Although not 
limited to fi  nancial products and services, 
the sandbox enables the development of 
innovative products and services for which 
no regulatory framework presently exits 
under Mauritian Law.FIGURE 7: Timeline of Regulatory Sandboxes in Africa
2016 2018The National Bank of Rwanda (BNR)  set 
up a regulatory sandbox to enable the 
development and adoption of innovative 
fi  nancial technology in the payments space, 
becoming among the fi  rst to implement 
a regulatory sandbox in Africa. Since 
then, the BNR also created sandboxes for 
micro-insurance and another for deposit-
taking institutions. In April 2022, the BNR 
established its fourth regulatory sandbox to 
create an enabling regulatory environment 
for digital fi  nancial services and FinTech.
  OCTOBER    Mauritius
1 sandbox
2019
10
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africa2 Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaThe Bank of Uganda (BoU)  
launch its Regulatory Sandbox 
Framework. The regulatory 
sandbox aims to promote 
fi  nancial innovation and 
fi  nancial inclusion in Uganda by 
enabling FinTechs to improve 
their solutions and make them 
more appealing to consumers 
whilst concurrently providing 
BoU with an opportunity to 
learn about new fi  nancial 
technologies and assess their 
potential risks and benefi  ts.  JUNE    Uganda
1 sandbox  MARCH & APRIL   
  Zambia
2 sandboxes JANUARY    Angola
1 sandbox  AUGUST    Ghana
1 sandboxThe Central Bank of Eswatini  and 
partners establish a FinTech Regulatory 
Sandbox to create a conducive 
environment for disruptive and consumer-
centric innovation that drives eff  ective 
competition while preserving consumer 
protection and market integrity. 
The 5-stage sandbox environment 
hopes to encourage a more open and 
active dialogue between regulators, 
policymakers, FinTechs and incumbent 
fi  nancial institutions in Eswatini.The National Bank of Angola (BNA)  joins 
forces with global innovation consultancy 
Beta-i and the incubator Acelera Angola 
to create Angola’s fi  rst FinTech Regulatory 
Sandbox. The sandbox platform was 
offi   cially launched in January 2023 under 
the broader banner of BNA’s Payment 
System Innovation Laboratory (LISPA), an 
initiative aiming to promote innovation, 
bring diversifi  ed fi  nancial products and 
services to Angolan consumers and boost 
fi  nancial and social inclusion.The Bank of Ghana  launch its 
Regulatory and Innovation Sandbox, 
following a successful pilot 
implementation. The Regulatory 
Sandbox hopes to harness the 
potential of technology to develop 
an effi   cient and inclusive fi  nancial 
service industry without risking 
fi  nancial stability, and was also piloted 
alongside the eCedi (a general-
purpose digital currency).
The Intergovernmental Fintech 
Working Group  launch a cohort-based 
application process for its Regulatory 
Sandbox, providing a safe and controlled 
environment for South African FinTech 
companies to test new products and 
services.In recognition of the development of 
Zimbabwe’s fi  nancial services sector 
and the growing number of FinTech 
startups bringing innovative fi  nancial 
products and services to the table 
in the country, The Reserve Bank 
of Zimbabwe  launch the Fintech 
Regulatory Sandbox to foster a 
supportive and enabling research 
and development environment for 
these institutions.
In March 2021 the Securities and 
Exchange Commission  announce 
the launch of a Regulatory 
Sandbox, developed in partnership 
with the UN Capital Development 
Fund to enhance Zambia’s digital 
economy. In April 2021 the 
Bank of Zambia also institute a 
Regulatory Sandbox that allows 
small scale, live testing of payment 
system innovations in a controlled 
environment operating under 
special time-bound exceptions 
under the Bank’s supervision.Tanzania is the most recent 
country in East Africa to 
introduce Fintech Regulatory 
Sandbox regulations. 
While these have yet to 
be published as law, these 
regulations from the Bank 
of Tanzania  aim to provide 
a controlled environment for 
licensed fi  nancial service 
providers and FinTech 
companies to test their 
innovations.The Namibia Financial 
Institutions Supervisory 
Authority  launch its 
Regulatory Sandbox in May 
2023. Although the fi  rst cohort 
of the Sandbox was opened 
specifi  cally for innovations in 
the microlending industry, the 
purpose of the programme 
is to create an enabling 
regulatory environment that 
supports Non-bank Financial 
Institutions. ...CONTINUED  FIGURE 7: Timeline of Regulatory Sandboxes in Africa
2020 2021 2022 2023
  APRIL   
  Tanzania
1 sandbox  MAY   
  Namibia
1 sandbox  FEBRUARY   
  Zimbabwe
1 sandbox
  APRIL   
  South Africa
1 sandbox  MAY    Eswatini
1 sandbox
11
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaWorth noting, Africa had the third highest number of sandboxes worldwide in 2020, after East Asia & the Pacific and Europe & Central Asia25. Presently, there are a total of 23 
FinTech regulatory sandboxes across 16 countries in Africa, illustrated below:FIGURE 8: Sandboxes by Country
Egypt May 20194
3
2
1
0
Kenya March 2019
Uganda June 2021
Tanzania April 2023
Mauritius October 2016Mozambique May 2018
Eswatini May 2020
South Africa April 2020Rwanda April 2018Nigeria December 2019
Sierra Leone May 2018
Ghana August 2022
Angola January 2023
Zambia March 2021
Zimbabwe February 2021
Namibia May 2023
Please note the dates indicated on this chart represent 
when each country launched their first Sandbox.
12
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaRegulation of FinTech Sandboxes in Africa
1) Regulatory Framework
Regulatory Framework
Country Regulator Licencing Requirement
Egypt Central Bank of Egypt (CBE) No
Ghana Bank of Ghana (BoG) No
Kenya Capital Market Authority (CMA) Yes
Nigeria Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) No
Rwanda National Bank of Rwanda (BNR) Yes
South Africa Intergovernmental Fin tech Working Group (IFWG)26Yes
West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU)27 Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO) No
2) Eligibility Criteria 
Eligibility Criteria
Egypt The Regulatory Sandbox is available to applicants that:
• Are commercially registered FinTech providers or licensed financial institutions 
(either local, regional, or international) developing an innovative product, service 
or solution intended for deployment in the Egyptian market28.
• Demonstrate the product, service or solution is genuinely innovative with clear 
potential to improve accessibility, efficiency, in the provision of financial services.
• Demonstrate the utility of the proposed solution and how it either conflicts or 
does not clearly fit within the existing regulatory framework.• Offer a good prospect of identifiable benefit to customers, support digital 
transformation and financial inclusion in Egypt.
• Present a proposed project that is ready for experimentation with a realistic 
and well-developed business plan to be deployed on a commercial scale in the 
Egyptian market after the successful exit from the Regulatory Sandbox.
• Have necessary resources to support testing.
13
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaEligibility Criteria
Ghana The Regulatory Sandbox is available to applicants that:
• Are entities licensed under the Banks and Specialized Deposit-Taking Institutions 
Act (2016), the Payment Systems and Services Act (2019), and other Non-Bank 
Financial Institutions29. 
• Utilise new and immature digital financial service technology.• Present new digital business models not currently covered explicitly or implicitly 
under any regulation.
• Provide innovative digital financial services products with demonstrable 
potential to address persistent financial inclusion challenges.
Kenya The Regulatory Sandbox is available to applicants that:
• Have their company incorporated in Kenya or are licensed by a securities market 
regulator in an equivalent jurisdiction.• Intend to offer an innovative product, solutions or service in Kenya following a 
successful exit from the Regulatory Sandbox.
Nigeria The Regulatory Sandbox is available to applicants that:
• Have a product, service or solution that is innovative with clear potential to 
improve the accessibility, efficiency and quality in the provision of financial 
services and address gaps in or new opportunities for financial benefits or 
investments in the Nigerian economy.
• Provide a proposed project timeline within a limited transaction (value and 
volume).• Have conducted an adequate and appropriate assessment to demonstrate the 
usefulness and functionality of the product, service or solution. 
• Have the necessary resources to support testing in the sandbox, including the 
required resources and expertise to mitigate and control potential risks and 
losses arising from offering of the product, service, or solution.
• Have a business plan to show that the product, service, or solution can be 
successfully deployed after exit from the sandbox.
Rwanda The Regulatory Sandbox is available to applicants that:
• Demonstrate the financial product, service or solution is genuinely innovative 
with clear potential to improve the accessibility, efficiency and quality of the 
provision of innovative services, address gaps in or open up new opportunities 
for financing or investments in Rwanda and benefit financial consumers or the 
financial industry.
• Demonstrate the financial product, service or solution does not clearly 
correspond to products or services currently regulated under existing laws and 
regulations, including hybrid products or services.
• Demonstrate the financial product, service or solution will likely fall under the 
supervisory scope or regulation of the Central Bank.• Have conducted an adequate and appropriate assessment to prove the 
usefulness and functionality of the product, service or solution and identified 
any associated risks.
• Have necessary resources to support testing.
• Have a clear solution to deploy the product, service or solution on commercial 
scale after a successful testing phase.
• Have a proposed technical architecture and solution, detailing the specific 
technology and innovative ways in which the technology will be applied.
South Africa The Regulatory Sandbox is available to applicants or innovations that:
• Are intended for deployment in the South African market.
• Either explicitly challenges or does not clearly fit within the existing regulatory 
framework.
• Are beneficial to South African consumers or the South African market at large30.
• Are significantly different from other offerings in the market.• Are ready to be tested with fully developed technology and in possession of 
sufficient funding to cover the full testing period.
• Are licensed and in good standing in the other jurisdiction (for cross-border 
testing).
• Have obtained approval from the applicable regulator in the other jurisdiction to 
participate in an RSB test in South Africa (for cross-border testing).
14
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaEligibility Criteria
WAEMU The Regulatory Sandbox is available to applicants that:
• Are startups or small businesses developing a new financial technology product 
or service, with a sound business plan and demonstrable ability to execute their 
business model.
• Are a legal entity incorporated in one of the eight member states of the WAEMU.• Have a product or service that is innovative with the potential to improve 
financial inclusion in the WAEMU.
• Can demonstrate they have the necessary resources and expertise to develop 
and launch the product or service.
• Are willing to work with the BCEAO to ensure that their product or service 
complies with all applicable regulations.
3) Access & Application Criteria 
Access & Application Criteria
Country Application 
ModeApplication Fees Cohort Per Year Application Processing 
Time
Egypt Online No application, administration, or participation fees Two – Three cohorts per year 21 working days
Ghana Online No application, administration, or participation fees Hybrid Model3121 working days
Kenya Online Kenya Shillings Ten Thousand (KES 10,000) Applications reviewed on a rolling basis 14 working days
Nigeria Online No application, administration, or participation fees One cohort per year 60 working days
Rwanda Online No application, administration, or participation fees Three cohorts per year 10 working days
South Africa Online No application, administration, or participation fees Applications reviewed on a rolling basis Timeline dependant on the 
complexity of the application
WAEMU Online or In Person Fifty Thousand West African Francs (CFA 50,000) Two cohorts per year Not Disclosed
15
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africa4) Key Features 
Key Features
CountryTesting Period, Extension & Exit Customer Safeguard & Protection Requirements Filing & Reporting 
Requirements
Initial Testing 
PeriodAbility to 
Extend Testing 
Period32Exit 
StrategyRisk 
AssessmentSafeguard 
PlanData 
Protection & 
ConfidentialityConsumer 
Redress 
MechanismsInterim or Final 
ReportingRecords 
Maintenance
Egypt 6 Months ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Both
Ghana 6 Months ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Both ✓
Kenya Up to 12 
Months✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Both ✓
Nigeria 6 Months ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Both ✓
Rwanda Up to 12 
Months✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Both ✓
South 
Africa6 Months ✓ ✓ ✓ Both
WAEMU 6 Months ✓ ✓ ✓ Interim
16
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africa5) Benchmark Summary
Characteristics shared by all the sandboxes surveyed include:
An emphasis on innovation.  Each sandbox aims to create a regulatory 
framework that maintains and enables a globally competitive financial 
sector, and thus eligibility criteria screens for dynamic, high-potential 
companies with novel and unique technologies, products or services.
Potential to improve financial inclusion. While the digitalization of financial 
services has significantly increased the accessibility of financial services in 
Africa, more than 40% of the continent remains unbanked, while around 
90% of financial transactions are still cash-based33. Accordingly, each 
sandbox has eligibility requirements related to the product or service’s 
ability to make financial services more accessible to those currently 
underserved by the financial system.
Collaboration with the Regulator.  Each sandbox system aims to remove 
communication and logistical barriers between innovators and regulators 
to enable a mutual exchange of information. Accordingly, in addition to 
legal and regulatory compliance, eligibility criteria for each sandbox 
requires applicants to be willing to work with the regulator and provide key 
decision makers with an overview of their testing outcomes and innovative 
capabilities in the relaxed regulatory environment.
Resource availability. Applicants are also selected based on their resource 
capacity, both material and technical. This includes having the necessary 
finances to develop and launch the product or service, as well as the 
expertise to do so.
Online Access. Each sandbox system has enabled electronic access for 
sandbox applications, with varying degrees of sophistication. In Kenya, 
Rwanda, South Africa and WAEMU, this is in the form of downloadable 
application forms to be submitted to the relevant authority via email. In 
Egypt, Ghana, and Nigeria, applications are submitted to relevant authorities 
through bespoke online platforms.
Ability to Extend:  Sandbox guidelines in each country enable participants 
to extend the initial testing period by 3-12 months, with variations in the 
burden of proof required to justify the additional testing time requested.Interim Reporting: Although the frequency and scope vary across 
jurisdictions, sandbox guidelines in each jurisdiction mandate continual 
monitoring and evaluation of testing progress, with outcomes extracted 
into interim reports to be submitted to the relevant authority.
Characteristics shared by multiple sandboxes surveyed include:
Free Access: There are no application, administration, or participation fees 
in five of the seven sandboxes surveyed, reducing barriers to entry for 
prospective applicants.
Exit Strategy: Six of the seven countries surveyed require participants to 
have an exit strategy in place outlining how the firm will transition out of the 
Sandbox upon the conclusion of the testing period. This ranges from what 
participants will do should the test fail (Nigeria) to more detailed 
requirements for participants to cover both successful and unsuccessful 
testing outcomes (South Africa and Kenya).
Data Protection:  While every sandbox surveyed makes assurances that 
individual application materials, test plans and test results submitted to the 
regulator will be treated as confidential, only the Central Banks of Egypt, 
Nigeria and Rwanda place similar data security and confidentiality 
requirements on sandbox applicants. In each case, prospective applicants 
are expected to integrate safeguarding mechanisms specifically related to 
the protection of customers’ personal data or information for the duration 
of the testing process.
Integration of customer redress mechanisms , as with the Egyptian and 
Rwandese regulatory sandboxes. While each sandbox has requirements 
related to customer safeguarding and protection, participants in these 
programmes are further required to integrate mechanisms that provide 
financial compensation claimable by the customer if necessary. These 
robust customer protections ensure that risks are not only pre-assessed 
and mitigated to the extent possible, but customers are never adversely 
affected in the event of negative testing outcomes.
Multiple cohorts per year,  as with the sandboxes by the National Bank of 
Rwanda, the Central Bank of Egypt and the Central Bank of West African 
States. Regulators running multiple cohorts can increase competition in the 
financial services market, sharpen the learning curve of new technologies 
and the consumer protections needed for their implementation, build 
relationships with a broader range of FinTech companies and improve the 
efficiency of the regulatory process.
17
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaUnique competitive advantages by individual sandboxes include:
Multi-lingual repository of relevant sandbox guidelines and regulations , 
as with the National Bank of Rwanda’s regulatory sandbox, which offers 
translations in English, French and Kinyarwanda. Having multiple 
translations of seminal legislation promotes international cooperation, 
particularly for inter-African FinTech companies that may be looking to test 
their product or service in a new jurisdiction. Eliminating language barriers 
also has the advantage of reducing the risk of regulatory violations by 
ensuring maximum accessibility and comprehension of relevant regulation.
Public disclosure of lessons learned and testing outcomes , as with the 
Intergovernmental Fintech Working Group’s (IFWG) regulatory sandbox in 
South Africa. The IFWG published a Regulatory Sandbox Report  in October 
2022 that gave an overview of participant experiences and highlighted 
insights gained and next steps from the sandbox’s first cohort. Retrospective 
analysis provides learning opportunities for future applicants, ensures that 
regulators are publicly accountable to self-imposed performance objectives, 
and enables them to regularly improve their processes and approaches.
Robust records maintenance , as with the Central Bank of Nigeria’s (CBN) 
regulatory sandbox. Kenya, Nigeria and Rwanda all require participants to 
ensure records from the regulatory sandbox are properly stored or 
maintained. Participants in the CBN regulatory sandbox are required to 
ensure proper maintenance of records not just during the testing period, 
but for a period of up to 5 years thereafter. This practice enables both 
current and reflective reviews of testing by the Bank, and also supports the 
construction of a robust historical database of testing outcomes for 
regulators to draw on.
Expeditious application processing , as with the National Bank of Rwanda 
and the Capital Market Authority of Kenya. Rwanda serves as best-in-class 
in this regard with a commitment to an application processing time of 10 
working days, while Kenya follows with a commitment of 14 working days 
for applicants to receive a decision on the outcome of their application.
18
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaImprovements in, and surging adoption of, technology 
has shifted the landscape of payment systems in Africa, 
necessitating Payment Service Providers (PSPs) to 
concomitantly expand their service offering within the remit 
of permissible activities stipulated by regulators. While the 
service offering for PSPs varies geographically depending on 
regulation (discussed further in Section 2), there are common 
services offered by most PSPs that distinguish them from 
other FinTech players. Before delving into what PSPs are, it 
is important to contextualise the wider payment systems they 
are embedded in, which provide the platform within which 
PSPs operate. Contextualising Payment Systems
A payment system is a process that includes all the tools, 
systems, mechanisms, institutions, agreements, procedures, 
rules, or laws applied or utilised to effect payment. Payment 
systems enable transacting parties (e.g. a payer and a 
beneficiary) to exchange value – simply put, they enable the 
circulation of money34. Included in the umbrella of payments 
systems are any instruments or procedures that facilitate the 
circulation of money or relate to the system35. On a macro 
level, a national payment system encompasses all payment-
related activities, processes, mechanisms, infrastructure, 
institutions, and users in a particular country36. The figure 
below illustrates the typical structure of a national payment 
system in Africa, using the Kenyan context as an exemplar.Payment Service Providers in Africa: An Overview
Key Definition:
Payment System
A payment system is a 
process that includes 
all the tools, systems, 
mechanisms, institutions, 
agreements, procedures, 
rules, or laws applied or 
utilised to effect payment.
FIGURE 9: Structure of National Payments Systems in Africa
Source: Central Bank of KenyaService Providers Payment Instruments
Cheques
Cards
Direct Debits
RTGS
Banks
PSPs
Utilities
MerchantsEFT
A2A
RTGS (Regional)
E-wallets
GatewaysNACH
Card Schemes
NACH/ KEPSS
KEPSS/ SWIFT
NACH
REPSS (US/EUR)
EAPS (EAC currencies)
SWIFT
Scheme
Direct AgreementClearing Facilities/ Arrangements Service ProvidersUSERS/CUSTOMERS
PUSHBanks, MFBs,
MFIs, SACCOs 
Banks, MFBs,
MFIs, SACCOs,
IMTsPULL
PSPs
USERSSwitches Switches
AggregatorsBanks, MFBs,
MFIs, SACCOs,
IMTs
19
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaPSPs can be solely distributing, in which case they operate solely as gateway 
providers, but never come into possession of the funds. However, PSPs can also 
perform collecting services, in which case they also collect and transfer funds and 
thus also act as acquirers/processors. 
Mobile wallets, such as M-Pesa (Kenya), OPay (Nigeria) and M-Wallet (Morocco) can 
also act as the network for consumer transactions, replacing card networks. In this 
case, merchants can also connect directly to the wallet provider rather than going 
through a processor. In so doing, the gateway and acquirer/processor roles are also 
performed by the digital wallet39.
Benefits Provided by Payment Service Providers 
(PSPs)
Payment Service Providers have continued to play important roles in supporting 
economic activities in a country. They provide benefit to different economic agents (such 
as retail merchants, customers and suppliers) who use the payments system for their 
day-to-day economic activities. The benefits of PSPs can be summarised as follows40:
• Retail Merchants: PSPs provide transaction security and minimise the stress and 
risk of keeping or carrying cash. PSP platforms also enable retail merchants to easily 
assess the health of their business operation through synergies with e-payments. 
• Customers:  PSPs simplify transfer of funds, give access to quick credit (via credit cards) 
and enhance customers’ ability to assess spending patterns and manage finances. 
• Suppliers:  PSPs lower operational costs and risks from cash collection by providing 
an online platform for settlements.
• Government: PSPs can generate data that policymakers and regulators can deploy 
to monitor market trends in the retail sector, consumer spending and purchasing 
power. When used for reporting purposes, this data can also provide insights on 
national levels of financial inclusion as well as provide guidance for high-level 
decision making related to taxation.
Having mapped the payment system landscape in Africa, and the range of actors 
therein, the next section of this report proceeds to identify the licencing requirements 
for PSPs in select African countries transitioning quickly towards digital payments. 
Specifically, this study will focus on Egypt, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Rwanda, South 
Africa and the WAEMU, examining the licensing requirements for payment service 
providers in these countries. This provides the basis for a comparative analysis of 
the same to identify countries with particularly favourable licencing requirements 
for PSPs and thereafter highlight regulatory gaps preventing the realisation of a 
harmonised framework for PSP licensing in Africa.Payment Service Providers (PSPs)
For the purpose of this report, PSPs are defined as third-party intermediaries that 
enable the sending, receiving, storing or processing of electronic payments (such as 
credit or debit card transactions, e-wallets and mobile money) between two parties. 
Another definition of PSPs that aligns with our scope includes the one offered by 
the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority, which enumerates the types of entities that 
can be classified as PSPs. Worth noting, PSPs can also be categorised as those 
offering consumer-facing or retail services at the “front end”, and those that play the 
role of clearing, settling, and processing at the “back end”. Some payment service 
providers operate closed-loop systems which combine both front-end and back-end 
arrangements under one roof37.
How Payment Service Providers (PSPs) Work
Having defined payment systems and PSPs, it is important to highlight how the 
latter work and some of the key benefits they offer. PSPs facilitate transactions on 
a payment system through the interaction of instruments such as cards, electronic 
transfer, cash, cheques and channels like paper, point of-sale, internet, ATM, mobile 
phone, and personal computers38. Players in the payment industry can be loosely 
categorised as follows (although they are often involved in more than one role in the 
payment transaction model):
a. Gateway Providers  - collectively referred to as PSPs
b. Acquirers/Processors
c. NetworksKey Definition: Payment Service Provider
“Any person, payment and credit institution, or electronic money issuer 
with access to a regulated payment system that provides services 
to consumers or businesses who are not participants in a regulated 
payment system, for the purposes of enabling the transfer of funds 
using that regulated payment system”
- United Kingdom Financial Conduct Authority*
* Financial Conduct Authority, 2023. FCA Handbook
collectively referred to as payment providers
20
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africa1) Regulatory Framework
Regulatory Framework
Country Regulator Law Licencing Requirement 
(Yes / No)
Egypt Central Bank of Egypt Central Bank and Banking Sector Law No. 194/2020 Yes
Ghana Bank of Ghana Payment Systems and Services Act, 2019 (Act 987) Yes
Kenya Central Bank of Kenya The National Payment Act 2011 Yes
National Payment System Regulation 2014
Nigeria Central Bank of Nigeria Central Bank of Nigeria (Establishment) Act 2007 Yes
Banks and Other Financial Institutions Act (BOFIA)
Rwanda National Bank of Rwanda Law N°061/2021 of 14/10/2021 Governing The Payment System Yes
South Africa South African Reserve Bank National Payment System Act 78 of 1998 (NPS Act) Yes
National Payment System Amendment Act (N°22 of 2004)
WAEMU The Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO) Regulation N°15/2002 YesRegulation of Payment Service Providers in Africa
21
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africa2) Licencing Framework 
a) Eligibility Criteria
Licencing Framework 1: Eligibility Criteria
Egypt • Applicants must either operate in Egypt (natural) or be a foreign entity targeting Egyptian residents (juristic). 
• Juristic applicants are eligible to operate through agents, provided these agents have a physical presence in Egypt and are registered in a special register of 
the Central Bank.
• Applicants must agree to provide a monetary guarantee to ensure their compliance with licensing conditions, the amount and nature of which will be specified 
by the CBE Board of Directors.
Ghana • Applicants must have at least a thirty percent equity participation of a Ghanian41.
• Applicants must have a physical presence in Ghana in the form of a lease, tenancy agreement or similar.
Kenya • Applicants must be a legal person incorporated in Kenya.
• Applicants must meet all the conditions listed in National Payment System Act (2011) and the National Payment System Regulation (2014).
Nigeria • Applicants must be a corporate entity registered by the Corporate Affairs Commission (CAC).
Rwanda • Applicants must have a permanent place of business or a registered office in Rwanda.
• Applicants must appoint at least one person to be present at the place of business or registered office to address any queries or complaints from a user or a 
customer of the payment services.
South Africa • Applicants must be accepted as a member of Payment Association of South Africa (PASA).
• Applicants must sign the various agreements relating to Payment Clearing House (PCHs) in which it wishes to participate.
• Applicants must operate systems with volumes exceeding ten thousand transactions or payment instructions per month, and/or values exceeding ZAR10 million 
per month.
WAEMU • Applicants must be a legal person incorporated in one of the member states of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU).
22
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africab) Documentary Requirements
A selection of documents required across all, or multiple jurisdictions include:
Licencing Framework 2a: General Documentary Requirements
Country Application Company Profile Governance Systems & 
TechnologyEnterprise Risk 
ManagementCustomer 
ProtectionsApplication Form / Letter 
of Application
Proof of Application Fee 
Payment
Evidence of Initial Capital
Memorandum and 
Articles of Association
Certificate of 
Incorporation
Registered Place of 
Business
Business Plan
Company Profile42
Audited Financial 
Statements
Tax Identification 
Number & Compliance 
Certificate
“Fit & Proper” Form for 
Senior Management
Proposed Infrastructure 
& Internal Controls
Information Technology 
Policy
Risk Assessment and 
Management Framework
Letter of No Objection
AML / CFT Policy
Customer Protection 
Measures / Policy
Data Protection 
Measures / Policy
Egypt ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓43✓ ✓ ✓
Ghana ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Kenya ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Nigeria ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Rwanda ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓44✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
South 
Africa✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
WAEMU ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
23
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaIn addition to the preceding, the following jurisdictions also require:
Licencing Framework 2b: Specific Documentary Requirements
Kenya Nigeria Rwanda Ghana
• Certified copy of a valid license from the 
Communication Authority Kenya.
• Certified copy of the management 
agreement (for mobile payment service 
providers).
• Latest report from the Credit Reference 
Bureau.
• Description of how the payment service 
provider shall settle the payment 
obligations arising from its provision of 
electronic retail transfers.
• Terms and conditions that will apply to its 
customers, agents, and cash merchants.• Form CAC 2A (Return on Allotment of 
shares).
• Form CAC 7A (Particulars of Directors).
• Details of ownership and any significant 
changes in ownership in the last two years.
• Board Structure.
• Organisational Chart.
• Dispute resolution framework.
• Necessary certifications where applicable, 
such as: a Payment Card Industry Data 
Security Standard (PCIDSS) Certification; 
a Payment Application Data Security 
Standard (PADSS) Certification; and/or 
a Payment Terminal Service Aggregator 
(PTSA) Certification.• List of products and services to be provided 
with a breakdown of commissions/ prices 
to be charged to the customer.
• Governance arrangements.
• Selection criteria for agents and/or the 
outsourcing of parts of the activities45.
• Signed document describing contingency 
and disaster recovery plans for electronic 
payment facilities.
• Float management guidelines and 
measures.
• Measures for protecting beneficiaries’ 
funds against insolvency or closure.
• Proof of existence of a trust account with a 
licensed commercial bank in Rwanda.
• List of the owners and the percentages of 
shares owned by each.• Profile of shareholders indicating 
respective percentage shareholding and 
nationality. 
• Number and profile of Board of Directors 
and Key Management Personnel.
• Organisational Chart.
• Copies of Service Level Agreements (SLA) 
with all partnering institutions and third-
party service providers.
• Necessary certifications such as the 
Payment Card Industry Data Security 
Standard (PCI-DSS), the ISO 27001 
Certification and Compliance, and the EV-
SSL Tool, where applicable.
24
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africac) Access and Application Criteria
Licencing Framework 3: Application Procedure
Country Application Channel 
(Online / In Person)Application Fees Minimum Capital 
Requirement46 Licence Validity Period
Egypt Online / In Person Application Fee:  EGP 100,000
Inspection Fee: EGP 200,000Not Disclosed47Not Disclosed
Ghana48 Online Processing Fee:  GHS 12,000
Licencing Fee:  GHS 40,000GHS 2 million495 years
Kenya In Person Application Fees: KES 5,000
Authorization Fees:  KES 100,000KES 5 million 12 Months
Nigeria In Person Preliminary Licensing Fees: NGN 100,000
Successful Licensing Fees:  NGN 1,000,000NGN 100 million Approval-in-Principle for 6 months50
Rwanda Online RWF 5,000,00051RWF 50 million Indefinite52
South Africa Both ZAR 10,000 ZAR 10 million 12 Months
WAEMU Both CFA 100,000 CFA 100 million 5 Years
25
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africa3) Permissible Activities
Permissible Activities
Country Account 
Issuance 
ServicesPayment 
Initiation 
ServicesIssuing 
Payment 
InstrumentsAcquiring 
Payment 
InstrumentsFunds 
TransferMoney 
Business 
ServicesE-Money 
Issuance 
ServicesMerchant 
Acquisition 
ServicesPayment 
Services 
to Third 
PersonsPayment 
ProcessingPayment 
Solution / 
Application 
Development
Egypt ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Ghana ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Kenya ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Nigeria ✓ ✓ ✓
Rwanda ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
South Africa ✓ ✓ ✓
WAEMU ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Summary of Permissible Activities:
Account Issuance Services - services enabling cash to be placed in or withdrawn from a payment 
account as well as the management of payment accounts.
Payment Initiation Services - services facilitating the authorisation and/or execution of electronic fund 
transfers from a customer’s bank account.
Issuing Payment Instruments  - provide customers with various payments methods (such as credit 
cards, debit cards, or prepaid cards).
Acquiring Payment Instruments  - own, possess, operate, manage, or control infrastructure for the 
provision of payment services.
Funds Transfer  - services facilitating the transfer of funds from one account to another, either 
domestically or internationally.Money Business Services  - services enabling money remittances and money exchange.
E-Money Issuance Services  - services related to the issuance and management of e-money for the 
purpose of providing payment services.
Merchant Acquisition Services  - service enabling the aggregation and processing of payments  
for merchants.
Payment Services to Third Persons - services facilitating the acceptance or processing of payments 
for single or multiple third-party beneficiaries (such as utilities, informal financial groups, and banks).
Payment Solution/App Development - develop payment solutions and applications.
Payment Processing - provide payment processing services through gateways and portals, including 
services such as credit or debit card processing and online payments.
26
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africa4) Benchmark Summary
Characteristics shared by all licensing requirements for PSPs include:
A minimum capital requirement , ranging from approximately US$35,000 
at the lowest end of the spectrum (Kenya) to approximately US$550,000 at 
the highest end (South Africa). While stringent, the imposition of a minimum 
capital requirement helps to ensure that PSPs have the financial resources 
to meet their obligations to consumers and to cover any losses that  
may occur.
Characteristics shared by multiple licensing requirements for PSPs include:
Time bracketed license validity , five of the seven payment service 
provider regulators surveyed impose a maximum tenure of the validity of 
licenses once issued, requiring renewal upon the conclusion of these time 
horizons. These range from 12 months (Kenya, South Africa) to 5 years 
(Ghana and the WAEMU), with Rwanda as the only exception. The National 
Bank of Rwanda offers indefinite validity to PSP licenses once granted, 
unless revoked or suspended.
Straightforward application processes , either online or in person. The 
only exception is Nigeria, which has a staged / staggered application 
process where the Central Bank of Nigeria first issues an Approval-in-
Principal before granting a commercial license. 
A letter of no objection  for foreign entities from their home regulatory 
authority, allowing the applicant to provide payment services in another 
jurisdiction. This is only a requirement in Kenya and Rwanda, which are 
also the only two jurisdictions surveyed that permit licensed PSPs to 
provide money remittances or exchange services.
Merchant acquisition services , allowing licensed PSPs to aggregate 
merchant services (i.e. act as an intermediary between the customer and 
the merchant) and collect payments (i.e. process credit and debit card 
transactions) on behalf of merchants. However, only Ghana, Rwanda and 
Nigeria enable this physically (at the point-of-sale) as well as digitally. Issuing Payment Instruments , allowing PSPs to not only process payments, 
but also create and distribute payment cards (i.e. credit, debit, and prepaid 
cards). Historically a permissible activity typically reserved for banks, 
licensed PSPs in Ghana, Rwanda, South Africa and the WAEMU can also 
issue payment instruments to clients. 
Account management , allowing PSPs to not only process payments, but 
also issue and manage payment accounts. In Rwanda and the WAEMU 
region, licensed PSPs are permitted to place, hold or withdraw cash from a 
payment account, as well as engage in account management services. 
However, this is only to the extent these activities are in relation to any of 
the operations required for operating a payment transaction.
Unique competitive advantages by individual PSP regulators include:
The right to provide e-money issuances services , as in Kenya and Rwanda 
where licensed PSPs may issue, process, store, send and facilitate e-money 
or mobile money payments. 41 million new mobile money accounts were 
registered in East Africa in 2022, alongside 28 billion mobile money 
transactions worth about US$491 billion53. Given the penetration of mobile 
money in East Africa, this endowment for PSPs is likely a function of market 
dynamics and demand.
The ability to process payments on behalf of informal financial groups , 
as in Kenya which permits licensed PSPs to provide payment platforms for 
Savings and Credit Co-Operative Societies (SACCOs). Informal and semi-
formal finance (including micro-finance) sources have demonstrable 
capacity to accelerate private sector development in Africa. Given the 
prevalence of rotating savings and credit associations (ROSCAs) and 
accumulating savings and credit associations (ASCAs) in the African 
context, enabling PSPs to cater to these non-banking financial institutions 
is also a catalyst for financial inclusion. 
An emphasis on customer protection and security , as in Rwanda. Although 
regulators in each jurisdiction require applicants to present a risk 
management framework, the customer safeguard protections mandated 
by the National Bank of Rwanda place the consumer first. These include a 
requirement for a disaster recovery plan, consumer recourse mechanisms, 
a consumer awareness program and measures for protecting beneficiaries’ 
funds against insolvency or closure. The preceding therefore create a 
payment system landscape that is compliant with international standards.
27
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaThe Practitioner Perspective
An Interview with Chipper Cash
1. How has Chipper Cash’s service and product offering evolved since 
you started the company? 
Chipper Cash began with a few markets almost five years ago, including 
Ghana and Uganda. Our product and service offering in these countries 
continuously evolved, depending on customer needs. We realised that our 
customers not only wanted to send money to places such as the US, but 
also to several African countries. Our coverage has expanded one country 
at a time, and we now have capabilities allowing our customers to send 
money to over 21 African countries. Chipper’s growth has always been 
driven by consumer demand, which is part of our core value proposition.
Our service offering has also developed, moving from money transfers to 
also providing services like access to fractional stocks. The demand came 
from users in Africa that wanted to invest in the international brands that 
they consume. Chipper stepped in to address this demand, launching 
services in a selection of our markets for customers to invest in stocks like 
Tesla, Google, or Facebook. We are among the first to introduce this service 
in several of the markets where we operate. 
Finally, we also introduced Chipper for Business – financial service products 
for people with business interests who require increased transaction limits 
and diversified distribution channels for recipients.2. Chipper Cash is an Africa-focused platform but headquartered in San 
Francisco. What was the rationale behind setting up the company in 
Silicon Valley, despite its explicitly pan-African remit? 
Chipper decided to operate in Silicon Valley for ease of access to capital, 
and access to talent was another consideration. Certainly capital was easier 
to access in Silicon Valley than in most other markets. Today, however, we 
have arms across the continent and employees in several African countries 
including South Africa, Ghana, Nigeria, Rwanda, Uganda and Zambia. But 
capital considerations ultimately played a large role in the choice to start 
the company abroad.
3. While Chipper Cash is now operational in 21 countries, its African 
operations began in only a few African countries. From a regulatory and 
legal environment perspective, what pull factors made these jurisdictions 
attractive? 
Rwanda tops the list among countries regarding the ease of doing 
business on the World Bank listings. It also has a population that has high 
digital and literacy skills. Rwandese are already used to digital services 
like e-government, mobile banking, transport tickets, tax and more, so 
introducing Chipper services to Rwanda was an obvious move.
Other pull factors that attracted us include the demand for the type of 
services that Chipper offers. Rwanda, Ghana and Uganda have particularly 
large numbers of people in the diaspora who remit to their home countries, 
and each also has a relatively advanced FinTech ecosystem. Another 
reason we chose these countries has to do with where we thought it would 
be the easiest to begin operations from. Our plan was always to start from Jovani Ntabgoba , Rwanda Country Director, Chipper Cash
28
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africasomewhere and expand to other countries, so after these first countries we 
then moved to South Africa and now into Rwanda. We see all 54 African 
countries as our target market, given the penetration of mobile money or 
mobile banking across the continent. However, the initial three countries 
were chosen for their ease of market entry.
4. Financial Services was the most active sector by volume and value 
in Africa’s venture capital industry in 2022, attracting US$2.2 billion of 
the total deal value the ecosystem saw that year. What are some of the 
drivers fuelling the growth of FinTech and digital payments in Africa?
There are a number of drivers that are fuelling the growth in FinTech and 
digital payments. One is the general growth of African economies and 
supportive infrastructure. GDP growth rate per country has consistently 
hovered between 4% to 8% among several African countries, including the 
larger economies. Another driver is the growth in population and literacy 
rates, which subsequently support the payments business. Another factor is the improvement in the regulatory environment across 
several African countries that target FinTech investment. In Rwanda, for 
example, there are robust policies that support the FinTech sector. A key 
feature of Rwanda’s regulatory environment is the continuous review of 
the licencing requirements and the layers involved in FinTech regulation. 
For example, Chipper got licensed in 2022 based on a 2016 regulation, but 
as of today, there is an updated regulation of 2023 that has several great 
improvements.
5. In the Rwandese context specifically, are these regulatory updates a 
response to the dynamism of the industry to try and keep up with / meet 
the needs of the changing FinTech ecosystem?
To my surprise, the new regulatory changes were more  than what the 
FinTech ecosystem would demand for. For instance, the regulation in 2016 
placed the maximum daily transfer amount at about US$500. However, 
users expressed dissatisfaction with this threshold, and wanted to transfer 
more than this amount. Chipper Cash is now structured to accommodate up 
to $10,000 per day in Rwanda – but the new regulation allows customers 
to transfer up to US$50,000 per day. However, given that our current risk 
appetite is below this amount, we maintain maximum transfer per day at 
US$10,000 a day per customer. This transfer limit shows how Rwanda’s 
regulations are at par with, and at times even a few steps ahead of, the 
needs of the FinTech ecosystem.
Rwanda’s regulations are at par 
with, and at times even a few 
steps ahead of, the needs of the 
FinTech ecosystem.Rwanda has a population that 
has high digital and literacy 
skills. Rwandese are already 
used to digital services like 
e-government, mobile banking, 
transport tickets, tax and more, 
so introducing Chipper services 
to Rwanda was an obvious move.
29
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africa6. How else can payments regulation in Rwanda be updated to keep 
pace with rapidly evolving technology and business models, so as to be 
an attractive domicile for FinTech startups in Africa?
There is definitely room for improvement. Cryptocurrency has gained a lot 
of attention, not just in Rwanda, but across the continent. However, there 
is no regulation around cryptocurrency, and it is still prohibited for locally-
licenced entities to deal in cryptocurrency. The result is that entities engaging 
in cryptocurrency, of which there are several, are not even licenced. 
Another area that needs improvement is the Regulatory Sandbox, which 
is a very useful tool for innovators. However, comparing the eligibility 
requirements for a few sandboxes in Africa reveals the requirements 
for admission are very similar or close to the requirements for getting 
licenced. Given that they function specifically as a relaxed testing ground, 
requirements for sandbox entry should be significantly lower than the 
standard requirements for licencing. However, this is contrary to what is 
currently commonplace in the market, where the overlap between the 
requirements for sandbox participation and licensing is 80-100%. 
Another area that needs improvement is the ease of accessing capital. 
Capital is still very expensive in African countries, especially in industries 
like FinTech. It would be helpful if more incentives could be put in place 
to attract capital and further investment into the FinTech sector, such as 
income tax breaks, among others. Rwanda has done particularly well in this 
regard, as there is no VAT on the transfer of money within the payments 
system. If this were to be implemented in other countries, it would be of 
great benefit to payment service providers. 
Finally, processing times for licencing is another area that can be improved. 
Our experience within the African ecosystem is that it may take between one 
and three years for a startup to get a licence from the regulator. Business 
models are continually evolving, and both investor interest and startup 
business plans often change significantly in the extended period between 
the application stage and the approval stage. If possible, regulators should 
work towards streamlining and hastening approval processes. 7. Chipper Cash has tailored its service offering to the needs of its 
customers. What are the regulations surrounding customer protections 
in Rwanda, and how do variations in the same across Africa affect your 
ability to roll out new products and services?
Customer protection is a key aspect of our business as we deal with personal 
information and financial data of customers. Several African countries have 
introduced data protection policies, including Rwanda. To a large extent, 
there are lots of similarities between data protection policies in the African 
countries we operate in, and this has made compliance in the African context 
relatively straightforward for Chipper. In Rwanda, efforts should be made 
to ensure that users understand their rights. While there are differences 
between the two, Rwanda has a robust data protection policy, but people 
are not aware of the depth of Rwanda’s data protection laws, which benefit 
both the user and us as a company. While we do our best to educate Chipper 
customers, it’s possible more could be done by other organizations. 
8. Opportunities for FinTech startups and service providers to scale 
are growing exponentially in an increasingly interconnected global 
marketplace, which is also seeing a rise in borderless transactions. From 
an entrepreneurial perspective, what are the key challenges facing cross-
border payment service providers in the current regulatory landscape, 
and how can policymakers help address them? 
The main challenge is on the effects of fluctuating exchange rates. Exchange 
rates are unstable even across different African currencies, notwithstanding 
global currencies. Coupled with variations across market and off-market 
exchange rates, cross-border businesses are in constant flux as the value 
or exchange rate prescribed for transactions changes almost immediately. 
Harmonisation of exchange rates would go a long way in helping to manage 
currency volatility challenges in Africa. 
This can also be applied to regulation as whole, such that entities can get 
licences to operate in each region, instead of separate applications for each 
country. African economies still operate along regional blocs – with notable 
‘corridors’ in each such as Nigeria-Ghana-Senegal in the Western Region 
and Kenya-Uganda-Tanzania-Rwanda in the East African bloc. Existing 
similarities in regulation makes the concept of regional harmonization and 
integration comparatively easier and would have a tremendous effect on 
the interoperability of PSPs operating in each region or trade zones.
30
The Practitioner Perspective
An Interview with Centrika
1. What was the rationale behind Centrika’s inception, and what market 
need were you responding to at the time? How has your service provision 
and use of financial technology across each product evolved since you 
started the company?
Centrika is a FinTech company that started in 2016 to provide technology 
solutions to customers in Rwanda. Our first use case was in Transport. We 
saw an opportunity to digitise the transport system in Rwanda, which at the 
time operated in the traditional way – there was no technology used. Later 
in 2019, we also thought about digitisation of payments in the Transport 
industry and rolled out our SafariBus Card product to meet this need. 
Centrika also provide Event Ticketing & Management solutions. We 
saw opportunities arise from the different sports events and concerts in 
Rwanda, which historically utilised purely paper-based ticketing methods. 
We introduced TiCQet as an event ticketing solution - a mobile app, which 
also has a web-based interface that allows people to purchase and receive 
tickets in electronic format. We also introduced digital payments for those 
tickets, with the option to pay using a Visa card, MasterCard, or using any of 
the two mobile money options that are widely available in Rwanda – MTN 
Momo and Airtel Money.
Finally, another product that we are investing in and perceive wide utility 
of is KeyKiosk, a self-service payments machine for customers. One of the 
services the kiosks offer, for example, is the payment of utilities including 
electricity and water. We’re hoping to improve our service provision in the 
near future by integrating the KeyKiosk platform with IremboGov - Rwanda’s 
government service portal. By doing so, individuals can use our kiosks to apply, pay for and instantly receive a given service offered by IremboGov. 
We are working on partnership with different banks, and the kiosks also will 
serve as an agent to access banking services. 
2. You mentioned integrating KeyKiosk  within the IremboGov interface. 
What has the response been from institutions or organisations you’ve 
approached for product integration on the KeyKiosk product?
There has been enthusiasm from different institutions, both public and 
private, towards integrating our respective systems. Integration enables 
organisations to collect digital payments for goods and services through 
KeyKiosk, which eases their administrative workload while providing 
convenience and efficiency to their customers. Government institutions in 
particular have been very receptive and are eager to digitise public services. 
The IremboGov team has been doing great work - most of their services are 
now digitized, and that is why we want to plug into them and also use our 
channels to avail their services to the mass market.
3. Developmentally, is Rwanda in a place (from the perspective of mobile 
/ internet penetration and underlying digital infrastructure) where fully 
digital service provision for users is possible?
Absolutely, infrastructure in Rwanda is in place to allow digitization of 
different services. As an industry, we could see that the infrastructure was 
there, but the uptake of digital products by customers was low. This was 
the impetus for government initiatives to encourage a cashless transition 
and address how to promote the adoption of digital payments amongst Yvon Gilbert Nishimwe , Chief Executive Officer, Centrika
31
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africathe general population. An example was the cashless campaign run by the 
Central Bank of Rwanda alongside different stakeholders including Banks, 
Telecom Operators, and other FinTechs. It targeted people not only in Kigali 
city but also in remote areas to showcase digital products, raise awareness 
of their benefits and educate about their use. The support of the government 
in this digital transition has been very helpful. For example, FinTechs such as 
us get a lot of incentives. Imported material meant to accelerate the adoption 
of digital payment is now not taxed, where previously we used to pay a half. 
These incentives play a big role in supporting financial service providers to 
deploy FinTech solutions cheaply, which of course has a positive effect on 
the end user who are able to access the service at a reasonable fee.
As things stand today, the underlying infrastructure is ready and capable to 
enable the provision of fully digital services in Rwanda. A good example is 
a friend who recently informed me they have gone over six months without 
touching cash. So, whatever it is in Rwanda - be it paying for goods, services, 
transport – there is the capability for everything to be paid digitally. If one 
or two people can do so, it is something which can certainly be adapted in 
the mass market. 
4. Centrika holds an E-Money License from the National Bank of Rwanda. 
What permissible activities does this license permit you to engage in?
We applied for our E-Money License in 2019, and that was issued around 
the first quarter of 2020. This license allows us to provide e-money services 
(issue, redeem and transfer mobile money), or basically operate a mobile 
wallet. It also allows us to operate a trust account, which is a central account 
where all the money in the mobile wallet is held. 
5. Please walk us through your experience with the process of obtaining 
and maintaining licencing from the Central Bank.
Overall, the process of obtaining the licence was smooth. The requirements 
for obtaining the E-Money issuer license were very clear, and the Central 
Bank has a dedicated department to support FinTechs, or any other 
institution looking to apply. We had regular engagement with them, they 
guided us through the application process and how to prepare the required 
documents for the E-Money License. However, we encountered some delay receiving feedback. I think when 
the National Bank of Rwanda initially developed this license, they were 
expecting applications from large, well-established companies like MTN or 
Airtel. When we applied it came as somewhat of a surprise to them, as 
Centrika weren’t a very big company at the time, and we were in Transport 
and Digital Solutions. It took some time to explain how we intended to 
operate a wallet, and the issues doing so would resolve in the market. 
This was a bit of a challenge in the early stages of the application process, 
but once they understood, it was very straightforward. Thereafter, we had 
constant support and engagement from the Central Bank. They visited us, 
looked at our use case, and then went ahead and issued the license.
6. What measures would improve the user experience of obtaining 
approval and relevant licencing from the Central Bank for startups 
operating in the payments space in Rwanda, if implemented?
My first observation is the Central Bank really need to be closely monitoring 
ongoing developments in the FinTech industry, and thus ready to 
accommodate new entrants, initiatives, and innovations. The time taken to 
issue our E-Money License was longer than it needed to be, as the Central 
Bank viewed us through the lens of big companies and their existing use 
cases. Understandably though, as regulators the Central Bank must really 
understand what each applicant will be doing in the industry before issuing As things stand today, the 
underlying infrastructure is 
ready and capable to enable the 
provision of fully digital services 
in Rwanda. 
32
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africathem a license. Having a birds-eye-view of wider industrial trends in the 
financial services industry is key and would make the decision-making 
process more seamless. 
Secondly, the FinTech world is one of complexity and innovation. Individuals 
are creating products and solutions which no one at the Central Bank or at 
regulator level has ever encountered previously. The industry would benefit 
from an environment where innovators are given room to put out their new 
products and solutions where the regulator can observe and, from there, 
understand how to regulate the innovation. Fortunately, this is happening 
with the National Bank of Rwanda - they put in place a Sandbox which I 
believe is going to be tremendously helpful for FinTechs. 
7. What are some of the drivers fuelling the growth of FinTech and digital 
payments in Africa? Are these growth fundamentals sufficiently strong / 
compelling enough to guarantee the sustainability of African electronic 
payment markets in the long term?
The main drivers of basic financial services in Africa, as we have seen, come 
mainly from the high mobile phone penetration. The majority of Africa, 
being a rural population, access financial services through their mobile 
phones. There is however a need to see how they can be brought into the 
formal banking sector. At the moment, these basic financial services include 
remittances or a little savings. But there are several other banking products 
that can be offered through the same channels, allowing those communities 
or rural populations in Africa to achieve prosperity and improve their living 
conditions. This is a particularly interesting path for FinTechs, which are well 
placed to introduce or offer these more advanced financial products through 
mobile devices that will have a big impact on Africa’s rural population. 
We’ve seen this in the Transport industry. At Centrika, we are making good 
progress in digitising Rwanda’s transport system. But we’ve observed that 
most of the people we give transport cards to are unbanked. This presents a 
good opportunity to analyse how users load money onto their transport cards 
when they want to commute, with this information leveraged to identify other 
useful financial products that can be offered to these customers. Something 
like microloans for example, which would enable low-income commuters 
to borrow money at a certain fee for their journeys. I believe that would be a very good product for commuters, with the added benefit of attracting 
people to financial services. FinTech solutions can easily be deployed using 
existing technologies and client bases to broaden the overall landscape of 
financial services in Africa and improve financial inclusion.
8. How can regulators ensure Rwanda is able keep pace with rapidly 
evolving technology and business models, so to be an attractive 
domiciliation location for FinTech startups or Payment Service Providers 
of all sizes and maturity levels in Africa?
The first point worth emphasising is the regulator being aware or abreast of 
what is happening in the FinTech industry. Regulatory awareness of topical 
developments in financial technology is paramount to ensure appropriate 
regulatory frameworks are put in place pre-emptively, because FinTech is 
always innovating. If regulation cannot keep up with innovation, FinTech 
companies are faced with protracted processing and approval timelines 
before they can operate. 
Secondly, consideration of the employee and founder profile of emerging 
FinTech companies is also needed. Often you find these early-stage startups 
are being run by young individuals with nothing but a good idea and their 
computer. These founders aren’t equipped with the required knowledge 
to satisfy regulatory requirements or approach them to seek a particular 
license. It would be good for the regulator to avail training or workshops 
that can be attended by these sole proprietorships, to educate them of 
what is available and the requirements in place for regulatory compliance. 
Embedding education frameworks that constantly evolve based on market 
needs and trends is one way regulators can accommodate the needs 
of FinTech startups. Even with the National Bank of Rwanda’s regulatory 
sandbox, for example, applicants are expected to have a certain base level 
of understanding (in terms of how the regulator operates) to apply, which is 
somewhat prohibitive. It doesn’t accommodate these early-stage founders 
who may be interested in applying for the sandbox but unfamiliar with the 
access and application criteria to do so. Having supportive teams or a help-
desk in place to engage these small FinTech companies on a regular basis 
and help them understand entry and eligibility requirements for the sandbox 
would make it more inclusive.
33
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaThe Policy Perspective
An Interview with the Monetary Authority of Singapore
Sopnendu Mohanty , Chief FinTech Officer, Monetary Authority of Singapore
1. How has the landscape for FinTech in Africa evolved over the last 
decade, and what key trends do you see emerging in the sector?
One indicator of how Africa is doing in this sector, although not the only one, 
is how investors perceive opportunities in Africa. Looking at global FinTech 
investment last year, 80% of capital went to Asia and North America, and 
the remaining 20% was split between Europe, Africa and Latin America. 
Africa perhaps accounted for a little less than 10% of the capital allocation. 
From the perspective of absolute numbers, the allocation to Africa is still 
very low. But if you look at the data from the perspective of YoY growth, 
Africa’s growth trajectory is larger than the global growth trend in FinTech - 
somewhere to the north of 30-35% CAGR.
Although the opportunity for and progress of FinTech in Africa is on an upward 
trend, a question remains: is this progression happening fast enough? I think 
not. This is because Africa presents such a huge investment opportunity, it 
is prime for good growth, and has an advantageous population. Globally, 
4.5 billion of the world’s 7 billion people are Asians, roughly 1.3 billion come 
from Africa, and 600 million or so are from Latin America. Africa benefits 
from a youthful population whose distribution across the continent is less 
concentrated than in other markets. Take Asia as an example - India and 
China occupy more than 60% of its population, while Latin America, Brazil, 
and Mexico comprise roughly 50% of the region’s population. Interestingly, 
however, Africa’s population distribution is relatively more even. So, in terms 
of population distribution across several countries, I think the continent’s 
demographic dividends have not been fully capitalized. Finally, with the 
technology we see today, leapfrogging legacy systems is far easier than 
ever. Technology is more affordable and evolved, making leapfrogging 
easier and faster for Africa in the current climate.2. Given the onset of new technologies that make leapfrogging possible, 
how does the evolution of FinTech in Africa fare, relative to other emerging 
markets? Are there any markets with the tools or the capacity to leverage 
this new technology and leapfrog faster?
This is where I differ from my other esteemed colleagues in the industry - 
you don’t have to follow the path every country is or has taken. If you look 
at the history of FinTech, including Africa’s own story, it usually begins with 
payments. The payments space serving as the anchor point for the industry’s 
growth is understandable because the first interaction in a digital world is 
sending money efficiently to one another. Payments are the starting point 
of your digital experience as a customer and/or business. However, a broad 
and comprehensive strategic approach is necessary to transform financial 
services from payments to other financial products. The depth and breadth of 
this coverage define the stable and sustainable growth of financial services, 
leading to far more inclusion and a real impact on the economy.
FIGURE 1: STAGES OF FINANCIAL SERVICES TRANSFORMATION
In Africa, the first two stages (payments and lending) are relatively stable 
and well-established. For any economy to leapfrog digitally, individuals 
need access to payment services through their mobile phones. While Africa 
has a decent mobile phone penetration, the real economy is not moved 
by financial inclusion but rather by economic inclusion. Financial inclusion 
considers how to incorporate people into a financial system, which is Payments Credit Marketplace Insurance Savings
34
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africaessentially access to payment and credit services. Along with accessing 
credit, there is a need for an enabler that powers economic progress. 
This is where the third leg comes in, which is the digital marketplace. The 
task is to ensure Africa’s marketplace develops sufficiently such that what 
was a constraint on the continent’s ability to move goods and services 
becomes an opportunity for development through a transition to digital 
commerce. Economic inclusion becomes possible with these three in 
place - access to payment, credit, and the digital marketplace.
Once economic inclusion has been established, you can start thinking 
about risk management. This is where the fourth leg - insurance - comes 
into play. Namely, how can ordinary citizens and businesses in Africa 
access affordable insurance which protects them from unanticipated risk 
in their lifetime? The final one is to increase Africa’s savings potential. 
Doing so requires developing innovative financial solutions that incentivise 
individuals to increase their savings potential, which becomes the fodder 
for future capacity development and growth. Standard practice is to 
follow each stage of the track chronologically. However, for Africa to see 
economic inclusion on top of financial inclusion, regulators should view 
the preceding components holistically instead of conventional practice 
focusing only on mobile payments and lending.
3. Regulators are tasked with navigating several often-competing 
considerations. These include balancing innovation and consumer 
protection, as well as promoting competition in the payments industry 
while also ensuring market stability. What are some best practices for 
regulators seeking to strike this delicate balance in their oversight of 
FinTech and digital finance?  
As Africa’s digital economy develops – spanning digital finance, the 
digital marketplace and digital infrastructure – a consistent, progressive 
regulatory environment is needed to manage the transition of each system. 
Regulatory frameworks for financial services are often overcomplicated 
but need not be. Regardless of the regulatory body – it could be the 
Central Bank of Ghana, the Central Bank of Rwanda, or the Central Bank 
of Kenya – fundamentally, they all operate on a very simplified model that 
I call a regulatory stack.FIGURE 2: REGULATORY STACK
1. Know Your Customer (KYC).  The starting point for regulators is KYC 
processes because you don’t want people with unverified credentials 
participating in the digital economy.
2. Anti-money Laundering / Counterterrorism.  The second layer for 
regulators involves ensuring no ‘bad’ transactors within the institutions 
facilitating financial services.
3. Consumer Protection.  The third layer ensures the accountability of 
financial institutions to adhere to consumer protection requirements.
4. Market Integrity.  The fourth layer involves ensuring market participants 
in the financial system are preserving the integrity of the market.
5. Financial Stability.  In the fifth layer, regulators define prudential 
frameworks which ensure the market operates under the appropriate 
regulations that will protect the stability of the financial system. 
However financial regulation is more than just having rules in place - 
it’s also about the ongoing oversight and enforcement of these rules.
6. Technology Risk Management. The sixth and final layer concerns 
minimizing the risks associated with introducing technology into the 
financial system, given the rising integration of technology in traditional 
financial services.
Considering existing regulatory frameworks across all 54 African 
countries, they all fall under the breadth of these six layers. What makes the 
regulatory landscape complicated and fragmented is how each country Know Y our Customer (KYC)Anti-money Laundering / Counterterrorism Consumer ProtectionMarket IntegrityFinancial StabilityTechnology 
Risk Management
35
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africaexecutes this framework. For example, one country may require in-person 
identification to satisfy KYC requirements to open a bank account, whilst 
another may rely on digital infrastructure to meet the same requirement. 
Both countries are trying to solve the same issue – knowing their customer. 
But friction arises because of the diverging methods of doing so. The 
question thus becomes how Africa can come together and streamline this 
procedural construct towards universal and common experience.
4. What role can international cooperation play in shaping FinTech and 
payments regulation, and what are some examples of successful cross-
border regulatory frameworks?
The prevailing best practice belief regarding good cross-border regulation 
is that it is achieved by what is referred to as regulatory passporting. This is 
where a licensed entity in Kenya could do the same seamlessly in Rwanda, 
for example. This is considered the ‘Nirvana’ of cross-border regulatory 
alignment, but the reality is, that implementing regulatory passporting is 
very difficult.
Optimal cross-border regulation lies not in passporting but in consistently 
deploying procedures to address each component of the regulatory six-
stack. Collaboration towards developing a consistent procedural approach 
is required between the 54 countries in Africa or, more realistically, between 
any logical group of countries on the continent (e.g. East or West Africa). 
Accordingly, the way customer policies are defined in Kenya ought to 
be equal to customer procedures in Rwanda or Tanzania. If this occurs, a 
Kenyan FinTech company can land in Rwanda for licensing and submit the 
same documentation to the Rwandan Central Bank. The benefit is mutual – 
Rwandese regulatory authorities will find the documentation very familiar, and 
the FinTech company will find it administratively and bureaucratically easier to 
pursue licensing in Rwanda. Challenges arise because of the inconsistencies 
in the approach to the same framework of regulatory concerns. At a 
minimum, procedural elements of regulations should be consistent. Hence, 
consistency rather than merely passporting is more pragmatic, cost-effective, 
and straightforward than passporting across jurisdictions.5. How can regulators ensure Rwanda is able keep pace with rapidly 
evolving technology and business models, so to be an attractive 
domiciliation location for FinTech startups or Payment Service Providers 
of all sizes and maturity levels in Africa?
Rwanda, a relatively small country with very strong governance, has the 
elements necessary to transform and reconstruct its economic system 
rapidly. Rwanda’s key priority is shifting its economic design as closely 
as possible to a pure, 100% digital economy. As a well-governed country, 
Rwandese citizens are also positioned for seamless integration into this 
new digital economy. Rwanda has good public infrastructure and a strong, 
competent regulatory body within their Central Bank. If they can implement 
established best practices into their regulatory processes and incorporate 
risk management frameworks whilst accepting modern technologies for 
Banks and FintTechs, then Rwanda has the best chance to be the fastest-
growing digital economy on the continent.
However, critical to Rwanda’s success is maintaining consistency with global 
best practices from a regulatory perspective and having an appropriate 
financial technology infrastructure. Rwanda’s ability to attract FinTech 
companies that can build innovative solutions hinges on this and its capacity-
building efforts across three levels: at the policy level, for producers of 
economic activity, and for consumers of economic activity. On the policy side 
of capacity building, it is important to have policymakers who understand 
the importance, complexity, and opportunity of a digital economy. Capacity 
building for the producers of economic activity refers to Rwanda’s ability to 
create digitally native businesses – i.e., fully digital companies from the day 
they start business. Finally, on the consumer side, the ability of the general 
population to understand and consume digital services while also being 
aware of consumer protection rights and cyber hygiene must be cultivated. 
Such an approach will turbo-charge the financial technology development.
36
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaDriven by a combination of in-depth interviews with representatives from relevant 
stakeholders and complimentary research, this section identifies countries with a 
comparative advantage over others and highlights continental gaps in both the 
licencing for payment service providers and regulation for sandbox innovation, 
highlighting strategies or additions that will harmonize regulation across Africa. 
Creating a Framework for Responsible and 
Innovative FinTech Services: Recommendations 
for Regulatory Sandboxes
Encourage Collaboration and Partnerships
In multi-peak jurisdictions (those that have more than one financial services regulator), 
coordination mechanisms are essential to ensure effective and efficient financial 
services for consumers, as well as greater collaboration within the industry. This is 
particularly so in jurisdictions with multiple regulatory sandboxes hosted by different 
prudential regulators. This is the case in Nigeria, for example, which has the Financial 
Services Innovators Sandbox  run by the Nigeria Inter-Bank Settlement System (2019); 
the Regulatory Incubation Program  run by the Securities and Exchange Commission 
(2021); and the most recent Regulatory Sandbox run by the Central Bank of Nigeria 
(2023). Similarly, Egypt has concurrent FinTech regulatory sandboxes in place, run 
by the Central Bank of Egypt (2019) and the Financial Regulatory Authority (2022).
Given that FinTech innovations often fall within the supervisory scope of different 
regulators, linking independent sandboxes can have the dual benefit of providing 
a single entry point for FinTech firms testing products that span across more than 
one regulator, while also enabling all relevant authorities to work together on 
applications and tests. This approach was successful in Hong Kong. In 2016 the 
Monetary Authority, Securities and Futures Commission, and the Insurance Authority 
linked (not merged) their independent regulatory sandboxes, providing a single entry 
point for applicants under a new banner called the “Fintech Supervisory Sandbox”54. 
In this framework, pilot trials of cross-sector fintech products can access multiple 
sandboxes concurrently, with the result being an increase in the number of firms 
testing across the three sandboxes55.Policy Recommendations
Collaboration should also extend beyond regulatory authorities to include relevant 
stakeholders in the broader financial services ecosystem, including innovators in 
the field, financial institutions, consumer associations, policymakers and any other 
relevant regulatory body or advocacy group. Engaging such actors in the design 
and implementation of regulatory sandboxes will ensure a more comprehensive 
understanding (and therefore addressal) of the industry’s needs and challenges. 
Regular stakeholder engagement through the creation of symposiums, working 
groups or associations has the additional benefit of building trust and promoting 
knowledge sharing. In addition to self-regulating national FinTech associations, 
examples of forums that foster this collaboration on a continental level include the 
African Fintech Network (AFN), the Africa Financial Industry Summit (AFIS) and the 
Better Than Cash Alliance. 
Develop Multi-Jurisdictional Sandboxes
Given the borderless nature of FinTech, regulatory sandboxes can be leveraged as 
a tool to promote cross-border regulatory harmonisation and enable innovators to 
scale more rapidly on a regional and continental level. The ability for innovators 
to deliver scalable, financially sustainable solutions is contingent on creating larger 
economies of scale to support business models through cross-border transactions. 
Multi-jurisdictional sandboxes can facilitate regional regulatory convergence through 
shared or joint testing programs.
Three multi-jurisdictional sandboxes are currently underway in Africa. The first is the 
West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), whose Financial Innovation 
Laboratory  is accessible to all eight member states of the Union. The second multi-
jurisdictional sandbox is amongst members of the East African Securities Regulatory 
Authorities (EASRA). In July 2018, the EASRA adopted a framework to ensure fitness of 
capital market practitioners who operate regionally, including through the employment 
of regulatory sandboxes56. The final multi-jurisdictional sandbox belongs to the West 
African Monetary Zone. Launched in May 2023, the West African Monetary Institute 
and EMTECH Solutions developed a strategic partnership to modernise country-level 
and regional regulatory sandboxes, enabling the harmonization of heterogeneous 
Fintech regulatory policies and frameworks across member states. Existing regional 
37
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africacooperative efforts, including intergovernmental organizations, economic and trade 
unions, can be used as vehicles to initiate joint or shared regulatory sandboxes. Not 
only would this negate the need for regulatory arbitrage across individual sandbox 
jurisdictions, but it could also facilitate seamless “passporting” of FinTech solutions 
across borders, as piloted in the European Union (EU) for remittances57. In the long 
term, pan-African economic integration projects such as the African Continental Free 
Trade Area (AfCTFA) can also serve as a framework to leapfrog regional harmonisation 
of regulatory sandboxes to continental harmonisation.
Implement Thematic Sandboxes as a Tool for 
Financial Inclusion
Thematic sandboxes are emerging as tools to advance financial inclusion. All five 
regulators surveyed identified financial inclusion as part of their mandate, either 
directly or by targeting enabling technologies or services. The regulatory sandboxes 
below explicitly promote financial inclusion, with sandbox applicants expected to 
demonstrate how their innovation will domestically advance inclusion.
RegulatorInclusion 
ObjectiveProject Approach / 
Summary
Banco de 
MoçambiqueFinancial 
InclusionNow in its fourth edition, the Mozambican 
regulatory sandbox falls under the 
implementation of the 2016-2022 National 
Financial Inclusion Strategy58. The first cohort 
of sandbox participants in 2018 specifically 
targeted FinTech innovators advancing 
financial inclusion.
Bank of Sierra 
Leone (BSL)Financial 
InclusionThe BSL Regulatory Sandbox Pilot Program  
was expressly linked to Sierra Leone’s 
National Financial Inclusion Strategy 2017 – 
2020 and designed as a dedicated regulatory 
environment to facilitate new business models 
that have clear potential to benefit Sierra 
Leone’s consumers and advance its financial 
inclusion strategy59.In the case of the Bank of Sierra Leone, this commitment to supporting inclusive 
financial innovation went beyond the selection criteria for its regulatory sandbox to 
include financial assistance for successful applicants. The first cohort of the sandbox 
pilot program were the winners of the Sierra Leone FinTech Challenge, which offered 
cash prizes and US$100,000 of seed capital in addition sandbox admission60. Given 
the scarcity of capital available for startups in their early stages of development, 
this approach mitigates participatory constraints and ensures the regulator, and its 
private sector partners, espouse the same values it screens its participants for.
Given the lower levels of financial intermediation, bank competition, and macro-
financial linkages in sub-Saharan Africa relative to other regions, regulators and 
central banks can benefit from considering FinTech as a leapfrogging opportunity 
to foster inclusive economic growth and development61. Inclusivity minded 
policymakers should therefore consider linking their sandbox programs to national 
financial inclusion strategies, thus amplifying the capacity for financial technology to 
improve the quality of access to financial products and services and be an enabler 
of inclusion in their jurisdiction.
Relax Entry and Eligibility Requirements for Sandbox 
Applicants
A market study of 45 market sandbox participants from Indonesia, Japan, Korea, 
Malaysia, Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Taipei, and Thailand highlighted how 
burdensome application processes can hinder market satisfaction both in the 
functioning of sandboxes and the interaction with regulator62. Survey respondents 
highlighted several suggestions for improving the existing piloting frameworks 
in their respective jurisdictions, which can also be applied to the African context 
considering the high degree of overlap between requirements for licensing and 
sandbox participation in all five countries benchmarked. These include:
1. Reducing application and evaluation processing times.
2. Simplifying and reducing paperwork, particularly with the frequency and scope of 
interim progress reports. 
3. Exploring the possibility of digital means for inspection report provision, expanding 
communication channels beyond static, formal paper-based procedures to 
include email, video conferencing, face-to-face meetings or direct contact with 
firm representatives.
38
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaMoreover, in some cases, if sandbox application processes are complex, unclear, or 
constantly evolving, firms may consider entry into sandboxes to be cumbersome. 
Relaxing entry and eligibility requirements for sandbox applicants opens avenues for 
market entry for a broader cohort of innovative firms that would otherwise struggle 
to establish themselves due to high regulatory thresholds.
Leverage and Create Education Opportunities
In resource-constrained emerging and developing economies, there is a knowledge 
gap between regulators trying to navigate complex evolving markets for financial 
services and the innovators responsible for these new tech-enabled business models, 
products, and services. Bridging the FinTech skills gap is therefore necessary for 
any meaningful public-private collaboration towards joint understanding of industry 
developments, as well as establishing whether (and how best to) manage these 
developments.
Strategies for regulators to build internal knowledge and capacity should include 
investing in training for mid-to senior-level officials on underlying technologies as 
well as the legal, cyber and security challenges of FinTech oversight operations. In 
so doing, regulators are equipped with a sufficiently strong understanding to provide 
useful guidance and support to FinTech firms participating in the sandbox. One 
avenue for such upskilling is leveraging online and in-person courses by suitable 
academic or financial institutions. Examples include the Monetary and Capital 
Markets Department of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) or the Centre for 
Finance, Technology and Entrepreneurship which offer training for both corporates 
and governments63. Additionally, making use of technical assistance from specialist 
development agencies such as FSD Africa (which partnered with both the Bank 
of Sierra Leone and the Bank of Ghana in the implementation of their regulatory 
sandboxes) or the UN Capital Development Fund (which similarly partnered with 
Zambia Security Exchange Commission in 2018).
Beyond internal capacity building, regulators should also create education 
opportunities for prospective sandbox applicants. Possibilities for this include: 
a. Regular office hours with startups to answer questions, strategize solutions, and 
support with compliance, including access to mentors and experts.
b. Development of tools and resources (such as checklists or FAQs) to improve 
accessibility and transparency of application processes and requirements. c. Public disclosure of historic and incumbent sandbox testing outcomes and 
lessons learned to guide future cohorts.
Creating a Framework for Responsible and 
Innovative FinTech Services: Recommendations 
for Payment Service Provider Licensing 
Develop Sophisticated Risk Management Options
Central banks and regulators are traditionally risk-averse, valuing stability over 
innovation. The inherent novelty of FinTech developments presents challenges 
to regulators, who are justifiably concerned over the risks these developments 
may have on safety, consumer protection and data privacy. Coupled with the lack 
of subject specific technical knowledge, this risk aversion can be magnified by 
internal resource constraints, which further problematise the prospect of regulating 
technology-enabled financial innovation. FinTech regulators are thus tasked with the 
delicate balancing act of fostering innovation while mitigating risks to consumers 
and the financial system. 
In Africa, this risk aversion manifests itself in lengthy due diligence and approval 
processes for licensing. This can have a detrimental effect to companies under 
review, especially for startups that may want to begin operations along the way. While 
the need to carefully select which firms should be granted licensing is paramount, 
regulators should consider implementing sophisticated risk management options 
that nevertheless enable startups with a comparatively higher risk profile to begin 
operations, albeit with appropriate controls and safeguards in place. This could be 
by imposing limits on the number of individual transactions these firms can offer to 
users, as well as placing a cap in transaction values per month. Placing restrictions 
such as these during a company’s ‘risky phase’ minimises its economic liability, 
and also enables regulators to conduct ongoing due diligence (rather than lengthy 
ex-ante due diligence) on the firm’s performance, monitor their transactions, and 
examine customer complaints. 
39
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaIntroduce Tiered or Phased Licensing Options
Another risk mitigation strategy regulators should consider is introducing tiers within 
existing licence categories. This is the case in Nigeria, where the Central Bank offers 
a six month Approval-in-Principle (AIP) license for PSPs, only authorising a final 
commercial license following a satisfactory pre-license inspection of the applicants 
premises and facilities. The AIP license allows PSPs to begin operations while they 
work to meet the full requirements for a full license, ultimately reducing the time and 
cost of bringing new FinTech products and services to market. 
Another way to add flexibility to licensing regimes is by phasing or customising 
existing requirements for new entrants. A phased approach would subject applicants 
to regulatory controls in stages, whilst a customised approach would tailor regulatory 
controls to applicants reflecting their individual risk levels, with both based on the 
size, type, and service scope of the FinTech provider64. Integrating a tiered approach 
to regulatory scrutiny will not make regulatory oversight more targeted, but it can 
also be instrumental in reducing barriers to entry (by expediting entry of FinTech 
entities with comparatively low risk business models and practices) and enhancing 
competition and innovation65. 
For example, within Africa the Central Bank of Kenya offers a three-tiered licensing 
framework for PSPs, while the Bank of Ghana offers six categories of PSP licences. 
Beyond Africa, the Monetary Authority of Singapore and the Reserve Bank of India 
both offer a three-tiered and two-tiered licensing framework for PSPs, respectively. 
Pursue Regional Harmonisation
Despite the similarities in FinTech regulation and licensing requirements across 
several countries, as evidenced in the comparative analysis exercise in Section 
2, having a PSP licence in one country does not guarantee similar authorisation 
in another country in the same region. For example, Chipper Cash is licensed 
in Rwanda, but was denied similar licensing in neighbouring Kenya66. This is 
particularly counterintuitive considering wider continental frameworks for cross-
border payments such as the AfCTA’s Pan-African Payments and Settlement System , 
which is working to eliminate fragmentations such as these and provide a payment and settlement service in which commercial banks, payment service providers and 
fintech organisations across the continent can connect as participants67.
A standardised, coordinated, and harmonised FinTech regulatory framework is 
key to eliminating duplicity. For example, in 2022 Kenyan mobile money transfer 
company PesaPal was licensed as a Payment System Operator in Uganda and as 
a Digital Payment Systems Provider in Tanzania, permitting it to operate in both 
countries. More recently, in 2023 the firm was also licensed as a Payment Service 
Provider in Rwanda. Despite these positive outcomes, the need to pursue separate 
application processes to enable market integration for a single entity lends itself 
to regulatory duplicity. In the long term, regulators should consider developing bi 
or multilateral agreements to facilitate cross-border interoperability, based on the 
mutual understanding that their supervisory regimes have congruent regulatory 
objectives which aim to deliver comparable outcomes, and thus have similar 
compliance requirements68. Such agreements would thus enable licensed PSPs to 
operate cross-jurisdictionally without the need for further authorisation, eliminating 
regulatory inefficiencies and siloes/fragmentation.
Recognising that regional harmonisation of FinTech regulation and licensing 
requirements is a long-term goal, in the interim regulators should work towards 
compliance with international standards (such as ISO 20022) and frameworks 
(such as the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and the General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR), among others). Maintaining parity with global benchmarks such 
as these provides a near-term baseline that African regulators can work towards on 
the journey towards regional, and ultimately continental, harmonisation. 
A standardised, coordinated, and harmonised 
FinTech regulatory framework is key to 
eliminating duplicity. In recognition of this, the 
Central Banks of Egypt and Nigeria recently 
signed a landmark MoU establishing a “FinTech 
Bridge” between the two countries to develop 
joint regulatory projects, coordinated licensing 
and legal frameworks and talent development.69
40
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaEmbed RegTech70 as a Tool for Efficient Regulatory 
Supervision
A 2018 study on the use of RegTech by Central Banks in in India, Mexico, Nigeria, 
Nepal and the Philippines highlighted how technology can be harnessed to improve 
the efficiencies of supervisory and regulatory tasks and enhance internal reporting 
processes71. Examples of RegTech used by regulators in the financial services 
industry across Africa include:
• Ghana : The Bank of Ghana launched the Online Regulatory and Analytical 
Surveillance Software , a single portal to collect prudential data from banks and 
deposit-taking institutions. It also centralises the data from all the departments into 
one solution, which will improve the Bank’s reporting and analytical capabilities72.
• Kenya : The Insurance Regulatory Authority developed the Electronic Reporting 
System , an integrated system to automate collection, review and analysis processes. 
The system has helped the regulator automate an array of functionality including 
submission, data aggregation and summary reports73.
• South  Africa : The Financial Services Board developed a system that automates the 
processing of insurance claims, which has helped the regulator reduce time taken 
to process claims and provide customer feedback74.
• Zambia : The Pensions and Insurance Authority developed a holistic risk-based 
supervision system for its 600+ regulated entities, on-site and off-site inspections 
capabilities, and a single portal for data submission75. This has enabled the regulator 
to consolidate and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the data it collects, 
including licensing for new market applicants.
Given the expanding oversight scope for Central Banks with the rise of FinTech 
and digital financial services, regulators should make use of similar technology 
where possible to streamline internal processes and systems. Avenues to integrate 
RegTech include in automating reporting, live monitoring and enforcing of regulatory 
compliance, and integrated collection of granular data to improve predictive and 
algorithmic supervision.
41
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaEndnotes
1 The Banker, 2023. Payments Innovation the Key to Financial Inclusion in Africa
2 McKinsey, 2022. Sustaining Digital Payments Growth: Winning Models In Emerging Markets
3 The future of payments in the Middle East, 2021 https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-
services/
4 McKinsey and Co., 2022. Sustaining Digital Payments Growth: Winning Models in Emerging Markets
5 United States International Trade Administration, 2023. The Rise of eCommerce in Africa
6 Central Bank of Nigeria, 2023. E-Payment Statistics
7 McKinsey and Co., 2022. The Future of Payments in Africa
8 UNECA, 2021. Covid-19 Impact on E-Commerce: Africa
9 McKinsey and Co., 2022. The 2022 McKinsey Global Payments Report
10 FTX Intelligence, 2023. Nigeria’s Digital Economy: Building a Digital Payments Ecosystem
11 Republic of Ghana Ministry of Finance, 2020. Press Release: Government Launches new Policies to 
speed up Financial Inclusion and Digital Payments to Transform the Economy
12 Ministry of ICT & Innovation, 2023. Press Release: The Government of Rwanda Launches a National 
Awareness Campaign On Digital Payments
13 South African Reserve Bank, 2023. Media Statement: South Africa Clears the Way for Broader 
Financial Inclusion With the Launch of a Low-Value, Real-Time Digital Payment Service
14 Cellulant, 2023. The Rise and Rise of Proximity Payments in Africa
15 GSMA, 2023. The State Of The Industry Report On Mobile Money 2023
16 United Nations International Telecommunication Union Data Hub
17 World Bank, 2022. The Global Findex Database 2021
18 Finmark Trust, 2022. The State of the Digital Payments Ecosystem in South African Townships
19 Akinyemi, B and Mushunje, A., 2020. Determinants of Mobile Money Technology Adoption in Rural 
Areas of Africa
The 10 countries chosen for the survey in this study include Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Mozambique, Nigeria, 
Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, and Uganda.
20 Tay, S., 2020. Expansion Of Mobile Money In Africa: The Transaction Fee Concern In Ghana And 
Uganda 
Other pricing models used by mobile money operators include percentage-based pricing (where a flat 
percentage fee is applicable, regardless of transaction value) and the free model (where no transaction 
costs are incurred by the user).
21 Karombo, T., 2022. Why African Governments’ Obsession with Mobile Money Could Backfire
22 World Bank and Bank for International Settlements, 2020. Payment Aspects of Financial Inclusion in 
the FinTech Era
23 African Development Bank, 2022. Understanding The Importance of Regulatory Sandbox 
Environments and Encouraging Their Adoption
24 World Bank, 2020. Brief: Key Data from Regulatory Sandboxes Across the Globe
25 World Bank, 2020. Brief: Key Data from Regulatory Sandboxes Across the Globe
26 This consists of the National Treasury, the Financial Intelligence Centre, the Financial Sector Conduct 
Authority, the  National Credit Regulator, the Sou  th African Reserve Bank, the South African Revenue 
Service and the Competition Commission.
27 The Central Bank of West African States have a FinTech Sandbox (the Financial Innovation Laboratory) 
that is accessible to all eight member states of the West African Economic and Monetary Union. This includes Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte D’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo.
28 The Central Bank of Egypt’s Regulatory Sandbox also accepts applicants testing solutions that offer an 
already existing service or product, but that use a new and innovative mechanism or technology. The 
Regulatory Sandbox is also open to mature FinTech providers that have already finalized their solution.
29 These include Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions, Payment Service Providers, 
Dedicated Electronic Money Issuers, Savings and Loans Companies, Microfinance Companies, 
Financial Holding Companies and Unlicensed FinTech Start-Ups.
30 For Business-to-Consumer companies, benefits the innovation should be able to demonstrate or bring 
about include lower prices, increased competition and/or improved accessibility (financial inclusion). 
For Business-to-Business companies benefits the innovation should be able to demonstrate or bring 
about include lower costs, increased efficiency, and/or improved compliance.
31 The Regulatory Sandbox of the Bank of Ghana is operated in a hybrid model that fuses the cohort 
model and the rolling model. It invites prospective applicants to submit applications during a specific 
application window, but also allows entities to apply at any time outside the subject areas published for 
a cohort, with admission exercised at the discretion of the Bank.
32 While each of the jurisdiction surveyed permit testing extensions, the duration of these vary by country. 
In Egypt, the initial testing period can be extended for a maximum overall testing period not exceeding 
12 months, while in Ghana and Kenya participants may request to extend the initial testing period for a 
duration of no more than three months and 12 months, respectively.
33 The Banker, 2023. Payments Innovation the Key to Financial Inclusion in Africa
34 South African Reserve Bank, 2015. Directive For Conduct Within The National Payment System
35 National Council for Law Reporting, 2011. The National Payment System Act, 2011
36 Cenfri, 2018. Payment Systems in Sub-Saharan Africa
37 Financial Stability Institute, 2021. Fintech and Payments: Regulating Digital Payment Services And 
E-Money
38 Cenfri, 2018. Payment Systems in Sub-Saharan Africa
39 Deloitte, 2022. Payment Providers: The Race to Scale and Expansion Into New Markets
40 World Bank, 2016. Innovation in Electronic Payment Adoption: The Case of Small Retailers  
41 Except in the case of applicants for a PSP Standard License, which requires 100% Ghanaian ownership.
42 Company profile should detail current type of products and services being offered, and the program of 
operations to do so.
43 While not in the mode of a “Fit and Proper” form, The Central Bank of Egypt required applicants to 
meet minimum fitness and probity requirements for Directors and Senior Management.
44 Information technology policy should be accompanied by evidence that an accredited body entitled to 
regulate information communication technology in Rwanda certified the technology infrastructure for 
the PSP operating their network.
45 Should include copies of any agency or outsourcing agreement if outsourcing of parts of the activities.
46 At the time of writing (August 2023), the USD equivalent of the minimum capital requirements for each 
jurisdiction are as follows: 1) Ghana: ≈US$175,000 ; 2) Kenya: ≈US$35,000; 3) Nigeria: ≈US$130,000 ;  
4) Rwanda: ≈US$43,000 ; 5) South Africa: ≈US$550,000 ; and 6) WAEMU: ≈US$167,000
47 Article 185 of The Central Bank and Banking Sector Law No. 194/2020 identifies a minimum capital 
requirement as a condition for granting a license to operate payment systems or provide payment 
services, but does not prescribe a specific value for what this minimum statutory capital is/will be. 
42
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in Africa48 There are currently six categories of PSP licences issued by the Bank of Ghana: a Dedicated Electronic 
Money Issuer (“DEMI”) license, a Payment and Financial Technology Service Provider license, and the 
PSP Scheme, Enhanced, Medium and Standard Licenses, respectively. The data in this table covers 
the application procedures for the PSP Enhanced License. For a breakdown of permissible activities, 
capital required, tenor and licensing fees for each PSP category, please refer to Notice No BG/GOV/
SEC/2019/16 .
49 Where the company has foreign shareholders, the company must satisfy the Ghana Investment 
Promotion Centre minimum foreign capital requirements under the Ghana Investment Promotion 
Centre Act, 2013 Act 865).
50 The Central Bank of Nigeria grants an Approval-in-Principle (AIP) valid for 6 months if it is satisfied 
with the PSP license application and accompanying documents submitted. Upon obtaining an AIP 
from the Central Bank, applicants are then required to pay a NGN 1 million license fee and apply for a 
final licence within six months of obtaining their AIP. The Central Bank only issues a final licence if it is 
satisfied with its inspection of the applicant’s registered place of business, the duration of which is at 
the discretion of the Bank.
51 Application fees for a PSP license for remittances differs from that for other payment services and is 
RWF1 million.
52 Once granted, PSP licenses are valid perpetually until revoked or suspended by the National Bank of 
Rwanda.
53 The East African, 2023. Mobile Money Transfers Beat Other Digital Payment Platforms
54 Hong King Monetary Authority, 2016. Circular - FinTech Supervisory Sandbox (FSS) 
55 UNSGSA, 2019. Early Lessons on Regulatory Innovations to Enable Inclusive FinTech
56 East African Securities Regulatory Authorities, 2018. Press Release: East African Securities Regulators 
Agree on Criteria for Fit and Proper Assessment of Market Practitioners  
57 Wechsler, M., Perlman, L. and Gurung, N. (2018) The State of Regulatory Sandboxes in Developing 
Countries
The ‘passporting’ concept allows for entities licensed in one-member country to operate across borders in 
another with an approved ‘passport’ within the union, which has been used for money transmitters in the 
EU.
58 Banco De Moçambique, 2023. Press Release: Governor Of The Banco de Moçambique Launches the 
4th Edition of the Regulatory Sandbox
59 Consultative Group to Assist the Poor, 2018. What Can We Learn from Sierra Leone’s New Regulatory 
Sandbox?
60 Bank of Sierra Leone, 2018. Press Release: Sierra Leone FinTech Challenge
61 International Monetary Fund, 2019. FinTech in Sub-Saharan African Countries: A Game Changer?
62 APEC Economic Community, 2021. FinTech Regulatory Sandboxes Capacity Building Summary Report
63 Notable alumni of the latter include the Monetary Authority of Singapore, the Central Bank of Eswatini, 
and the State Bank of Vietnam.
64 World Bank and Bank for International Settlements, 2020. Payment Aspects of Financial Inclusion in 
the FinTech Era
65 TheCityUK and PwC, 2022. Fintech In Kenya: T owards an Enhanced Policy and Regulatory Framework66 Business Daily, 2022. CBK Warns Flutterwave And Chipper Cash Not Licensed To Operate In Kenya
67 AfCFTA, 2023. The Pan-African Payments and Settlement System
68 TheCityUK and PwC, 2022. Fintech In Kenya: Towards an Enhanced Policy and Regulatory Framework
69 African Business, 2023. Egypt and Nigeria Unite on FinTech  
70 “RegTech” refers to the use of technology for compliance and regulatory purposes by regulators and 
the entities they supervise.
71 Gurung, N. and Perlman, L., 2018. Use of RegTech by Central Banks and Its Impact on Financial 
Inclusion 
72 Regnology, 2020. Integrated Financial Supervision System Supports Bank of Ghana Reforms
73 Regnology, 2019. The Insurance Regulatory Authority Kenya Accelerates Risk-Based Supervision
74 Opoku-Afari, M., Abugre, J., and Oppong, K., 2022. Playing-Catch Up: SupTech and RegTech 
Developments in Africa
75 Regnology, 2020. The Pensions and Insurance Authority (PIA) Zambia Gains New Efficiencies With 
Online Submissions
43
Unlocking the Potential of Digital Payments in AfricaE avca@avca-africa.org
W www.avca.africa
C www.avcaconference.com
T +44 (0)20 3874 7008Contact AVCA
37 North Row, 3rd Floor
London W1K 6DHFor further information, contact
Kigali / Rwanda
BPR-PCD Tower, 4th FloorFor further information, contact
research@avca-africa.org
E info@rfl.rw
W www.kifc.rw
T +250 786 422260

Extracted from: avca23-05-industry-survey_3.pdf
2023 African Private Capital 
Industry Survey
Behind the Scenes: LP and GP 
Perspectives Unveiled
DECEMBER 2023Executive Summary
This marks the third edition of the AVCA’s Private Capital Industry Survey, 
offering a comprehensive exploration of the perspectives, plans, preferences, 
and expectations of 88 investors, including both Limited Partners (LPs) and 
General Partners (GPs) actively involved in Africa’s private capital industry. 
Diverging from previous editions, this survey deliberately weaves a comparative 
narrative, contrasting insights gathered from investors during the second half 
of 20221 with the tangible outcomes extracted from AVCA’s quarterly report by 
the close of Q3 20232. 
Unlike its predecessors, the survey strives to bridge the gap between investors’ 
foresights and the unfolding realities. Approaching the conclusion of 2023, the 
survey seeks to answer the critical questions: did the actual events align with 
or challenge the investors’ expectations and plans? Did the unfolding reality 
validate or question their initial views? 
In 2023, the global landscape remained tumultuous, marked by a concurrence of 
macroeconomic and political factors that not only persisted from the previous 
year, but in some cases, intensified. The year unfolded against a backdrop of 
heightened geopolitical tensions, supply–demand imbalances, and exacerbated 
by escalating interest rates and monetary tightening measures aimed at 
addressing rampant inflation. In this environment, the global economy found 
itself navigating a path of slow and uneven growth, with emerging markets facing 
distinct challenges3. This uncertain landscape significantly affected the trajectory 
of private investments worldwide, posing significant hurdles across regions. 
Investors across the globe grappled with a series of challenges that, in retrospect, 
might have seemed unimaginable.
1  Please note that responses from LPs and GPs were collected from August 2022 to December 2022.
2  AVCA, 2023 Q1-Q2 African Private Capital Activity & Q3 2023 Private Capital Activity in Africa
3  International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, October 2023.
4  Year to Date (YTD) refers to the period encompassing the first three quarters of 2023.Survey findings from the latter half of 2022 revealed resilient optimism among LPs 
and GPs towards private capital, with LPs inclined to increase African allocations 
and GPs anticipating positive 2023 fundraising. The reality, however, presented 
a mixed picture, highlighting the nuanced dynamics between expectations and 
actual fundraising outcomes during 2023. Specifically, despite a decrease in the 
value of final closed funds in 2023 YTD4, optimism persists due to substantial 
progress in interim closes. Not only did these interim closes surpass 2022 figures, 
but they also demonstrated consistent growth in total capital raised across all 
fund sizes.
Regarding sectoral preferences, both LPs and GPs demonstrated unwavering 
commitment to Africa’s private capital industry, expressing keen interest in 
various sectors, with technology and financial services taking the lead. These 
preferences aligned seamlessly with the unfolding developments in 2023 YTD, 
where the financial sector maintained its allure, while technology-enabled deals 
continued to dominate investments. 
Turning to regional preferences, while LPs favoured West Africa and GPs leaned 
towards East Africa, recent 2023 YTD data revealed a varied landscape marked 
by a significant industry-wide slowdown in deal-making across all African regions 
due to adverse macroeconomic conditions. Despite this, West Africa retained its 
appeal, attracting the largest share of the total investment volume. 
LPs and GPs demonstrated a shared interest in growth and venture capital, 
reflecting the enduring popularity of these strategies in the African private capital 
landscape. This growing enthusiasm is mirrored in the sustained prominence 
of venture capital, a transformative force in the region, which represented a 
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
2substantial 69% of reported investments in 2023 YTD. Concurrently, there was 
a noteworthy collective emphasis on climate-centric strategies, with 52% of 
LPs and 39% of GPs expressing keen interest. The growing commitment to 
addressing climate challenges was further evident in the success of climate-
focused funds in 2023 YTD, where eight such funds raised commitments 
totalling US$0.5bn from LPs.
In the realm of challenges, both LPs and GPs faced formidable obstacles in their 
African private capital endeavours. For LPs, enduring concerns revolved around 
a weak exit climate and macroeconomic risks, with the latter exacerbating the 
exit challenges, evident in only 25 full exits reported in Africa in 2023 YTD after a 
robust 2022. Meanwhile, GPs contended that macroeconomic factors posed the 
most formidable challenge. Persistent macroeconomic shocks throughout 2023 
have cast a shadow on fundraising, investment values, and exit activity for GPs, 
underscoring the overarching impact of these challenges on both LPs and GPs 
operating in the region.
Finally, in assessing private capital fund managers, LPs maintained a steadfast 
focus on the performance track record, with a history of successful investments 
and profitable exits remaining paramount. Additionally, the quality of the fund 
manager’s network emerged as a critical factor for LPs, acknowledging its 
substantial significance as a lever for value creation that contributes to the growth 
trajectory of portfolio companies in Africa.
Overall, analysing the survey results alongside the unfolding private capital 
activity in 2023 unveils a complex landscape for investors in Africa. The reality 
presents a multifaceted picture of the private capital industry, where LPs and GPs 
actively navigate the intricacies of the current economic and geopolitical climate, 
embracing both challenges and opportunities. As we look ahead, 2024 holds the 
next chapter of the African private capital arena, where investors will continue to 
adapt and innovate in response to the evolving landscape.
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
3LPs’ Planned Allocation to African Private Capital and GPs’ Fundraising Outlook
The global political and macroeconomic challenges, 
which have shaken the world since the outbreak of 
the Covid-19 pandemic, have significantly affected LPs 
operating globally. High levels of inflation leading to 
increased interest rates by central banks, supply chain 
disruptions, an energy crisis stemming from the Russia-
Ukraine war, geopolitical concerns, and an anaemic 
economic growth are just few of the challenges that 
investors are currently facing within the global context. 
In this macroeconomic turmoil, the long-term nature 
of the private capital asset class seems to align well 
with investors that have a long-term investment 
horizon, as it enables them to look beyond the current 
global challenges. In fact, LPs who participated in our 
survey seem to remain optimistic about the trajectory 
of the asset class with a significant 64% expressing 
their intention to increase their allocation to private 
capital worldwide. Delving into the respondent 
breakdown, Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) 
and Foundations comprise over half (55%) of those 
intending to increase their allocation. Known for 
their long-term developmental focus, these entities 
demonstrate their commitment to harnessing the 
potential of private capital despite current economic 
uncertainties.
The optimism toward private capital becomes even 
more pronounced when considering emerging 
markets, with a total of 96% of LPs stating their plans 
to increase or maintain their allocation within the next 
twelve months. Within this landscape, Africa emerges 
prominently, with 85% of LP participants planning 
to increase their allocation to African private capital, 
driven to do so primarily by Impact (77%) and their 
Investment Mandate (68%). Among these LPs, the 
majority consists of Development Finance Institutions 
(45%), followed by Pension Funds (15%), and Sovereign 
Wealth Funds (15%).of LPs plan to increase their allocation to private capital in Africa over the next two years, 
with Impact (77%) and Investment Mandate (68%) identified as the main factors driving 
their plans.85% 
Figure 1: LPs’ Planned Allocation to Private Capital over the Next 12 Months
Emerging and
frontier marketsAfrica Across
the globeDeveloped
markets
Increase Maintain Decrease Opportunistically85%15%
73%23%5%
45%36%18%
64%21%14%
Impact
Investment
mandate
Diversiﬁcation
Risk/return
proﬁle
Performance77%
68%
45%
41%
36%
Main Reasons to Increase 
Allocation to Africa
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
447%
28%
25% DeclineRemain the sameImprove
53%ProbablyDeﬁnitely
Can't sayUnlikely2%
22%
23%In line with the challenging global fundraising environment in 2022, Africa also 
faced significant difficulties indicated by the 54% year-over-year decrease in the 
total value of funds closed last year in the continent. Despite the tough global 
fundraising landscape of the previous year, GPs hold a positive outlook for 
fundraising in 2023. Specifically, almost half (47%) of the GPs surveyed expect an 
improvement in the fundraising climate. Furthermore, an even higher percentage 
of GP participants (53%) share their plans to raise new funds in 2023.Among 
them, nearly half (47%) have 10 to 20 years of experience in the Africa private 
capital industry. This indicates that GPs with an established track record and an 
extensive network of LPs may feel more confident in raising new funds despite 
unfavourable macroeconomic conditions. Furthermore, among these GPs who 
plan to raise new funds, the vast majority (80%) intend to raise larger funds 
than their previous ones, while 50% indicate that their new fund will include an 
additional investment strategy, which demonstrate their willingness to grow and 
diversify further their portfolios. These intentions align with findings from the 
interim fundraising in 2023 YTD, which reveal consistent growth in total capital 
raised across all fund sizes, with the average interim closes increasing from 
US$46mn in 2022 to US$73mn in 2023 YTD.Figure 2: GPs’ Fundraising Outlook over the Next 12 Months
Figure 3: GPs’ Fundraising Plans over the Next 12 Monthsexpressed among GPs with 47% expecting improved fundraising outlook 
for 2023, and 53% planning to raise new funds.Resilience and confidence
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
5LPs’ plans to increase their exposure to Africa, 
coupled with the positive expectations of GPs 
regarding improved fundraising conditions and 
their intentions to raise new funds, reflects the 
resilience witnessed in fundraising during the first 
three quarters of this year. Despite the challenging 
macroeconomic conditions faced by fund managers 
globally, fundraising activity in 2023 seems to be 
on a trajectory similar to that of 2022. Specifically, 
fund managers have successfully closed a total of 
US$1.2bn in final closes during 2023 YTD. While this 
figure is slightly lower compared to the same period 
in 2022 (US$1.6bn), there is cause for optimism 
emerging from the progress seen in interim closes 
throughout 2023. Notably, an additional US$1.8bn 
has been raised in interim closes, which already 
surpasses the value of interim closes recorded in 
Africa in 2022 (US$1.7bn). Therefore, the data from 
2023 YTD suggests that, despite the persistent 
industry challenges, fundraising activity in Africa is 
demonstrating signs of stability, with the potential 
for modest growth driven by interim closes.Figure 4: Total Value of African Private Capital Fundraising by Y ear, Final close and Interim closings, US$bn
20172.52.4
20182.52.8
20191.63.9
20202.41.1
20212.24.4
20221.72.0
2023 
Q1-Q31.81.2
Interim Closes Final Closes
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
6LPs hold a positive long-term outlook for private capital in Africa, with over half 
(52%) of respondents expecting it to be more attractive than other emerging 
markets in the next five years. In addition, a significant 48% of respondents 
predict that private capital in Africa will be more attractive than developed 
markets over the same period. It’s worth noting that perceptions vary by 
location. Specifically, among non-African LPs, 56% of them believe that Africa 
will be more attractive than other emerging markets in the next five years. 
However, 54% of these non-African LPs consider Africa to be less attractive 
than developed markets during the same period.
When considering Africa’s medium-term attractiveness, LPs do not seem to share 
an optimistic outlook. A majority believes that Africa will either be less attractive 
or maintain the same level of attractiveness as compared to other markets. 
Specifically, 59% of LPs express this sentiment concerning emerging markets, 
while 62% hold a similar view for developed markets. The decline in investment 
activity within Africa, mirroring a broader global trend observed across various 
regions (as illustrated in Figure 6), confirms these sentiments. Persistent global 
challenges have cast a shadow over private capital activity across the world, “The onset of long-term geopolitical uncertainty is currently one of the most impactful factors driving global asset 
allocation. It enhances Africa’s attractiveness relative to other geographies, as previously stable countries/ regions have 
become less predictable (while Africa is becoming more stable on the margin). However, it also makes global capital 
allocators much more selective about each new commitment. ” 
Richard Okello, Co-Founder and Partner, Sango Capital 
Figure 5: LPs’ views on the Attractiveness of Private Capital in Africa relative 
to other markets
More attractive Same level of attractiveness Less attractiveIn 2 years
In 5 years
In 2 years
In 5 yearsEmerging & 
Frontier MarketsDeveloped  
Markets41% 33% 26%
38% 4% 58%
48% 9% 43%52% 33% 15%of LPs believe that private capital in Africa will be more 
attractive than other emerging markets in 5 years, and 48% 
considering it more attractive than developed markets. 52% Attractiveness of African Private Capital: Insights from LPs and GPs
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
7inevitably influencing Africa’s attractiveness within our interconnected global 
landscape, at least in the medium term.
Overall, LPs who view African private capital as more appealing relative to other 
markets cite the continent’s growth potential as a key pull factor. This growth 
potential is driven by a combination of factors, such as a growing population, low 
market penetration, and a variety of industries which remain underserved. LPs 
also acknowledge the continent’s strong demographic dividend and burgeoning 
innovation ecosystem as important factors driving their belief in Africa’s 
attractiveness. 
Figure 6: Percentage change of Private Capital Deal Volume and Value between 
Q1-Q3 2022 and Q1-Q3 2023LPs and GPs have identified the same sectors as their top five most attractive 
for private capital investment in Africa in the next two years. However, the key 
difference lies in the order of sector attractiveness as viewed by LPs and GPs. 
For LPs, the financial services sector has attracted the highest level of interest, 
confirming the impressive growth the sector has experienced in recent years, 
driven by investments in Africa-based financial technology companies. This 
finding is further reinforced by the deal activity observed in the first three quarters 
of 2023. Despite experiencing a substantial 56% decline when compared to the 
same period in 2022, the financial sector still managed to secure the lion’s share 
of investments. Interestingly, this trend has shown remarkable consistency since 
2019, highlighting the enduring appeal and resilience of the financial services 
sector in attracting private capital in the African market. 
On the other hand, the largest share of GPs participating in the survey have 
expressed a greater inclination towards the technology sector as the most 
attractive for private capital investment in Africa. Among fund managers who 
identified technology as one of the most appealing sectors, the largest segment 
(41%) adopts venture capital as their primary strategy, while a substantial 38% 
prioritize growth capital as their primary investment approach. This preference 
among fund managers is not surprising, as the technology sector has developed 
into one of the highest-interest emerging sectors for private investment in Africa. 
That said, despite a decline in investment activity over the first three quarters 
of the year, there is a notable trend in technology or technology-enabled deals 
dominating the investment landscape, representing more than half (60%) of the 
total investments in Africa in 2023 YTD. This consistent trend has been shaping 
the investment landscape in Africa in recent years. As illustrated in Figure 8, the 
share of technology-enabled investments in the years preceding the pandemic 
averaged at 47% from 2017 to 2019. Since the onset of the pandemic, the annual 
average share of technology-enabled investments has surged to 66% from Global North
AmericaAsia Africa South
AmericaEurope
-37%-26%-20%
-31%-27%
-44%-34%
-54%-45%-41%-29%-25%
Volume Value (US$bn)Financial services emerged as the top-ranked 
sector for LPs, while technology took the 
lead as the most attractive sector for GPs. 
Source: AVCA, Pitchbook
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
82020 to 2023 YTD. This further highlights the vast 
potential within Africa’s technology sector, which 
has already demonstrated its ability to disrupt 
traditional businesses and enhance the quality of 
life for people and societies.Figure 7: Top 5 Most Attractive Sectors for Private Capital Investment in Africa
LPs
GPsMost attractive sector 5th most
attractive sector
Consumer Goods 
and Services
InfrastructureAgribusiness
Energy & EnvironmentFinancial Services Healthcare &
Life SciencesTechnology
Infrastructure Healthcare &
Life SciencesTechnology Energy & Environment Agribusiness
Consumer Goods 
and Services
Financial Services
“Technology is an enabler. We 
invest in technology to help 
build more efficient companies, 
improve accessibility to products, 
and enhance affordability. We 
leverage technology for digital 
transformation in traditional 
industries, particularly with 
essential providers of goods and 
services. ” 
‘Tokunboh Ishmael, Co-founder and 
Managing Director, Alitheia Capital
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
9Figure 8: Share of Investments in Technology & Technology-enabled companies, 2017 – 2023 YTD
LPs and GPs participating in the survey have demonstrated divergent preferences 
in their selection of attractive regions and countries for private capital investment 
in Africa. While most LPs have chosen West Africa as an attractive region, the 
vast majority of GPs (83%) consider East Africa the most appealing region for 
private capital investment, closely followed by West Africa (78% of GPs). Kenya 
and Nigeria, the largest private capital markets in East and West Africa, have 
been chosen as the most attractive countries among the majority of GPs. Egypt, 
interestingly, ranked in the top three for both LPs and GPs, owing to its increasing 
popularity as an attractive and viable investment destination and its emergence 
as a hub for venture capital activities within the continent. 
Setting aside these preferences, recent data from 2023 YTD showcases a varied 
regional landscape. The current macroeconomic environment has adversely 
affected the private capital industry across all regions in Africa, leading to a 
significant slowdown in deal-making compared to the same period in 2022. Of 
all the regions, West Africa has experienced the most considerable decline, with 57%43%
54%46%
48%52%
45%55%
21%79%
32%68%
40%60%
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
Q1-Q3
Non-Tech Deals Tech Deals
GPs ranked East Africa as the most 
attractive investment destination, with 
Kenya and Nigeria as their top choices, 
while LPs identified West Africa as their 
preferred region for investment.
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
10a 59% drop-in deal activity in 2023 YTD, largely driven by a downturn in venture 
capital investments. However, even with the slowdown, West Africa has managed 
to attract the largest share of the total investment volume (29%), primarily driven 
by Nigeria, which contributed 66% of the region’s investment activity. Southern 
Africa closely followed, securing 26% of the total deal volume, while East Africa, 
led by Kenya, ranked third in terms of deal volume.
Figure 9: Attractiveness of African regions for private capital investmentFigure 10: Attractiveness of African countries for private capital investment
‘’The positive aspect of the post-Covid era 
is that the competition between the two 
major groups of countries (US – BRICS)  
could benefit Africa, as the Western World is 
trying to become less dependent on Asia. This 
could be an opportunity for African exports. ’
Luc Rigouzzo, Managing Partner, Amethis 54% of LPs
83% of GPs57% of LPs
64% of GPs
75% of LPs
78% of GPs
14% of LPs
21% of GPs
25% of LPs
45% of GPsLPs’ Top 5 Most Attractive Countries
GPs’ Top 5 Most Attractive Countries
1
 Kenya
Nigeria2
Egypt4
 Ghana
Morocco5
Tanzania 3Côte d'Ivoire 
South Africa
Kenya 1
 Egypt3 Côte 
d'Ivoire5
Nigeria4
 Morocco2
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
11A significant majority of LPs (78%) view growth capital as an 
attractive investment strategy when investing in African private 
capital. This figure reinforces the long-lasting popularity of this 
strategy that has been tested and trusted by investors in Africa’s 
private capital industry. Unsurprisingly, venture capital closely 
follows with 74% of LPs expressing an interest in this investment 
strategy. This further solidifies venture capital’s emergence 
as a prominent investment approach with a potential which is 
recognised by LPs. The relatively recent rise of venture capital has 
significantly transformed the continent’s private capital industry in 
various ways. It has boosted Africa’s entrepreneurship, attracted 
investors from across the globe, promoted the establishment of 
local venture capital firms, and finally altered the dynamics within 
the different private capital asset classes in Africa. Notably, venture 
capital investments have accounted for a significantly increasing 
share of the total number of private capital investments reported 
in Africa, as shown in Figure 9. Following the trends from previous years, data from 2023 YTD reveals that 69% of all reported 
investments were in the venture capital space.
It’s particularly noteworthy that the third largest share of LP 
participants (52%) prefer climate-focused investments, indicating 
increasing attention to addressing climate challenges. This trend 
reflects a growing awareness among investors of the urgency 
to contribute to sustainable and environmentally responsible 
practices. Data from 2023 YTD reveals that eight climate-focused 
funds managed to raise commitments from LPs totalling US$0.5 
billion, representing more than a quarter (28%) of the total 
fundraising value of interim closes reported during the period. 
Moreover, the fourth largest group of investors is interested 
in infrastructure and tech strategies to promote inclusive 
development and bridge the infrastructure gap across the 
continent.
Figure 11: LPs’ Strategies of Interest in Africa 
78%
74%
52%
48% 48%
41%
37%
26%
15%
4%
Growth Capital Venture Capital Climate Focus Infrastructure Tech Focus Gender lens 
investingPrivate Debt Buyout Real Estate OtherInvestors’ Expectations and Preferences when investing in Africa Private Capital
of LPs identify growth 
capital as an area of 
interest, while venture 
capital and climate 
investing are the 
preferred choices for 
the largest part of 
GPs (39%) planning to 
modify their strategy. 78% 
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
12A significant percentage (63%) of GPs are already implementing, currently 
considering, or probably exploring ways to modify their investment strategies 
and themes. Within this group of GPs, venture capital and climate investing are 
their preferred choices (selected by 39% of GPs each). This preference echoes the 
substantial interest fund managers have shown in these investment strategies 
and themes in recent years. It also reflects the alignment of GPs’ strategies 
with the evolving preferences of LPs. By adapting to these evolving dynamics 
and shifting trends, GPs are positioning themselves strategically to meet the 
changing demands of the investment landscape.
Following closely behind are growth capital and private debt, selected by the third 
and fourth highest proportions of fund managers, at 33% and 30%, respectively. Private debt, in particular, has gained popularity within Africa’s private capital 
landscape and has demonstrated resilience amidst the current macroeconomic 
challenges. Data from 2023 YTD shows that private debt has maintained its appeal 
as an investment strategy. This highlights the continued demand for private debt 
as an attractive alternative source of funding in an environment marked by rising 
interest rates and stricter lending standards imposed by banks. 
Finally, LPs gave higher credence to gender lens investing, with 41% (Figure 11) 
naming it as an investing strategy of interest compared to just 27% of GPs who 
shared the same view.
Figure 12: GPs’ Intentions to Modify Investment Strategies and Themes
Venture Capital
Climate focus
Growth Capital
Private Debt
Gender lens focus
Tech focus
Buyout
Other
Real Estate
Infrastructure
Most preferred strategies and themes34%
Currently consideringAlready implementing
Not consideringProbably37%
10% 19%40%39%
39%
33%
30%
27%
24%
18%
15%
12%
6%
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
131985425
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
Q1-Q3
Venture Capital Private Equity Private Debt Infrastructure Real EstateFigure 13: Total Volume of Private Capital Deals in Africa, by Y ear & Asset class
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
14Over two thirds of LPs (71%) view the perceived 
exit climate and unpredictable exit window as a 
significant challenge when investing in private 
capital in Africa. Despite historical exit data failing to 
assuage these concerns, the record high of 82 full 
exits on the continent in 2022 indicated the potential 
for successful exits in the region. However, mirroring 
global trends, the current exit environment has 
caught up with industry dynamics due to prevailing 
macroeconomic uncertainties. Fund managers 
are struggling to exit investments and distribute 
cash to investors, leading to longer asset holding 
periods and exploring alternative liquidity options. 
The challenges in exiting investments were evident 
in the first three quarters of 2023 when only 25 full 
exits were reported in Africa after an outstanding 
previous year.
Another significant proportion of LPs (57%) 
identified macroeconomic risks as an important 
challenge when investing in African private 
capital. Among these risks, currency volatility and 
uncertainty remain a key concern for investors 
in Africa’s private capital industry which has 
been deteriorating recently. Unlike in the past 
when investors could identify specific countries 
facing currency issues and make decisions 
accordingly, today, it’s important to recognize that 
considerations surrounding hard currency volatility 
and liquidity shortages in local currencies impact 
several countries across the African continent.Figure 14: Biggest challenges for LPs investing in private capital in Africa
71%
57%
54%
54%
39%
14%
11%
4%
4%Perceived weak exit climate and 
unpredictable exit windows
Macroeconomic risks
Strategy misalignment with 
existing fund managers
Limited investment opportunities
Oversupply of funds
OtherComplicated or unfavourable 
regulatory environment (legal / 
regulatory / tax issues)
Limited number of GPs with 
performance track record
Unfavourable global 
macroeconomic environmentPotential challenges to LP and GP investment in Africa
A perceived weak exit climate along with 
macroeconomic risks are viewed by LPs 
as significant challenges when investing in 
African private capital.“Today, the areas without a risk of devaluation are limited. We must 
operate considering that devaluation risk can happen anywhere and 
in any sector. We will have to select our investments to be naturally 
hedged against devaluation because guarantees of stability are no 
longer certain. ” 
Romen Mathieu, Managing Partner & Paul Khoury, Partner, EuroMena Funds
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
15The most significant challenges in private capital investment in Africa are 
currently attributed to macroeconomic factors. Specifically, an overwhelming 
majority of GPs (85%) have identified the challenging macroeconomic factors as 
a significant obstacle to fundraising. Furthermore, these macroeconomic factors 
have emerged as the primary challenge faced by GPs in deploying dry powder 
in Africa, with 70% of GPs selecting them as a significant hurdle. The current 
economic uncertainty, the escalating currency volatility, supply chain disruptions 
resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and the ongoing war in Ukraine, along 
with increasing levels of geopolitical instability are all challenges that collectively 
pose significant obstacles to private capital investment in Africa.
An additional substantial percentage (65%) of GPs have highlighted the 
challenge of convincing LPs to invest in their funds as another significant hurdle 
in fundraising for 2023. Within this group, 60% are currently implementing or 
considering modifying existing investment strategies and themes with climate 
focus (43%), and venture capital (32%) being emerged as the preferred choice for 
43% and 32% of those GPs respectively. This trend is not surprising, considering 
the tremendous potential of climate-related financing and the remarkable growth 
of the venture capital sector in Africa. 
Under the “other” category, GPs have identified additional obstacles to fundraising 
in 2023. These include challenges such as unfamiliarity of LPs with new investment 
strategies, LPs’ preference for more established markets in Africa, difficulty in 
meeting reporting requirements for smaller teams, the struggle to convince new 
LPs to invest in the continent, and scepticism arising from negative perceptions 
about Africa.Figure 15: Key Challenges for GPs in Fundraising in 2023
Macroeconomic factors
Convincing LPs to invest
LPs’ preference for large funds
High competition
Difﬁculty in fundraising
for ﬁrst time funds
Other
High existing dry powder85%
65%
48%
28%
23%
18%
7%“The biggest challenge in our trade is who you are getting in bed with. Thorough background checks as well as a collaborative 
approach may help mitigate such risk. The second biggest challenge is the political governance. At the end of the day, 
the factor that will make you confident in the future or not is how the government abides by its own rules. A country 
characterized by volatility in its political governance will not be attractive to investors who pay attention to the rule of law. ” 
Jean-Marc Savi de Tové, Co-founder and Managing Partner, Adiwale Partners
Macroeconomic factors have been identified by the largest proportions of 
GPs as a significant challenge for fundraising and deploying dry powder in 
Africa. 
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
16Apart from macroeconomic factors, GPs investing in Africa in 2023 have identified 
several other noteworthy challenges, which fall under the “other” category 
(Figure 16). These challenges include companies’ lack of investment readiness, 
competition with DFIs investing directly, and the misalignment of expectations 
between sellers and buyers.
Figure 16: Key challenges faced by GPs in deploying dry powder in 2023
These challenges, amplified by the weight of macroeconomic shocks persisting 
throughout the first three quarters of 2023, have adversely impacted both 
fundraising and investment values compared to the same period in 2022 and 
2021. Specifically, as indicated in Figure 17, investment values in 2023 YTD have 
experienced a substantial drop of 45%, while fundraising has seen a relatively 
softer decline of 25% compared to 2022 Q1-Q3. However, there is a silver lining, 
as investment values, despite the decline in the first three quarters of 2023 
compared to the last two years, remain significantly higher than pre-pandemic 
levels.Figure 17: Total value of private capital fundraising and investments in Africa, 
2017 – 2023 (Q1 - Q3), US$bn 
70%
45%
38%
23%
11%
9%Macroeconomic 
factors
High valuations
Lack of suitable 
opportunities
Difﬁculty in 
deal-making
Other2017
Q1-Q32018
Q1-Q32019
Q1-Q32020
Q1-Q32021
Q1-Q32022
Q1-Q32023
Q1-Q3
Value of Fundraising Value of Investments0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
0.01.02.03.04.05.06.07.08.0
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
17The lion’s share of LPs (89%) emphasizes the 
significance of a strong performance track record when 
evaluating fund managers in Africa. Not surprisingly, a 
history of successful investments and profitable exits 
stands as the paramount factor for LPs considering 
potential investments in fund managers. Interestingly, 
of those who prioritize the performance track record, a 
significant majority (64%) admit to not having invested 
in a first-time fund manager in Africa in recent years. 
Moreover, 44% assert that they would not consider such 
an investment, citing the lack of a robust performance 
track record as a critical concern.
Apart from the performance track record, over half 
of LPs (54%) identify the quality of a fund manager’s 
network as another crucial element in their evaluation 
process. Research5 has indicated that, particularly in 
Africa, access to a private capital firm’s network can 
substantially contribute to value creation for investee 
companies. Hence, access to a PE firm’s network, 
including support with mergers and acquisitions, 
connections to industry specialists, suppliers, and 
customers, continues to play a pivotal role in the growth 
trajectory of African portfolio companies.
Conversely, while active management and reporting of 
ESG considerations, as well as the presence of a gender-
balanced management team at the fund manager level, 
are highlighted as key priorities for only a minority 
of LPs—comprising 18% and 7%, respectively—it’s 
important to acknowledge that perceptions around 
these aspects are evolving, and for a growing number 
of investors, they are becoming increasingly important 
considerations in decision-making.
5  AVCA & EY, How Private Capital Investors Create Value“The opportunities are there. What you need is a combination of 
careful investment selection, active management, and strong networks 
that can combine to result in compelling returns and impact. ”
Peter Rowse, Director & Principal, Metierof LPs consider the performance 
track record crucial when assessing 
fund managers in Africa. 89% 
Figure 18: Important factors in LPs’ evaluation of private capital fund managers in Africa
89%
54%
46%
0%36%
32%
29%
18%
7%Performance track record
Quality of network to source, manage 
and support target companies
Local ofﬁce / presence in 
target countries
Active management/reporting of 
ESG considerations
Gender-balanced management 
team at GP level
OtherOperational expertise 
in target sectors
Team size and investment capacity 
at GP level
Participation by known or 
respected LPs including DFIsKey Considerations for Assessing Private Capital Fund Managers
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
18More than half (61%) of the participating LPs expressed 
their willingness to consider investing in first-time fund 
managers operating in Africa. Interestingly, a significant 
proportion of these investors intend to increase their 
allocations to Africa, primarily driven by impact motives 
(79%) and investment mandates (71%). However, 39% of 
the LPs are hesitant to support first-time fund managers. 
When asked about the reasons, they cited their investment 
strategy as one contributing factor. In addition, they 
emphasized the significance of a proven track record, a 
criterion they consistently apply to both African and non-
African markets. 
In terms of actual investment activity, only a minority 
(39%) claimed to have invested in first-time fund managers 
in Africa within the last two years. As shown in Figure 20, 
the average annual led by first-time managers totalled 
US$0.4bn from 2017 to 2023 YTD. Notably, fundraising by 
first-time fund managers in the first three quarters of 2023 
has already matched the total amount raised in the entire 
year of 2022, highlighting an uptick in investor interest.of LPs express willingness to invest in a first-time fund manager, whereas only 
39% have actually done so in the past two years. 61% 
Figure 19: LPs investing in first-time fund managers in Africa
Would invest in a first-time GP in Africa Invested in a first-time GP in Africa over the last 2 years
Figure 20: Total Value of African Private Capital Fundraising by Type of Fund Manager, US$bn
1.90.5
1.61.2
3.50.4
4.20.2
0.1
1.01.70.3
0.90.3
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
Q1-Q3
Experienced fund managers First-time fund managers61%
No Yes39% 39%
61%
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
19AVCA conducted a survey of 88 Investors worldwide, 
utilizing an online questionnaire to gather insights. 
The survey encompassed perspectives from both 
African and non-African investors already engaged 
in private capital investments in Africa, as well as 
those intending to make initial investments in the 
region in the near future. The survey questions 
were designed to interrogate LPs and GPs’ views, 
plans and expectations about the private capital 
landscape in Africa. To ensure data integrity and 
confidentiality, access to the survey information 
was restricted solely to the involved researchers, 
and individual responses were treated with strict 
confidentiality.LPs’ Type and GPs’ Investment Strategy 
36%
14%25%
7%
4%
4%11%Development Finance 
Institution
Pension Fund
Fund-of-Funds
Sovereign Wealth Fund / 
other Government-sponsored 
Organisation
Foundation
Multi-asset manager
Other
Venture Capital Growth Capital Private Debt Infrastructure Real Estate BuyoutPrimary Strategy Secondary Strategy Other Strategy 53%31%8%3%3%2%
29%19%33%
5%14%
42%17%
8%33%32%
GPs LPs68%Survey Respondents PARTICIPANTS’ PROFILE
LPs' Type
GPs’ Investment Strategy
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
20Assets under management
Experience in the industry HQ Location
GPs LPsAfrica Europe North America Asia-Paciﬁc Middle East75%
41%
8%33%
26%
10%
3% 3%4%
4%5%5%
8%39%
32%42%21%
29%10%Exploring our ﬁrst 
investments
Up to 2 years
2-5 years
5-10 years
10-20 years
More than 20 yearsGPsLPs58%US$100mn-US$250mnLess than US$100mn
US$501mn-US$1bnUS$251mn-US$500mn
More than US$1bn8%
19%
14%2%
31%
US$500mn-US$999mnUnder US$500mn
US$5bn-US$9.9bnUS$1bn-US$4.9bn
US$20bn-US$49.9bn
US$50bn+US$10bn-US$19.9bn12%
19%
27%12%LPs’ total assets under management 
Years of investing experience in AfricaGPs’ African assets under management
© 2023 AVCA  |  December 2023  |  www.avca-africa.org 2023 African Private Capital Industry Survey
21E avca@avca-africa.org
W www.avca-africa.org
C www.avcaconference.com
T +44 (0)20 3874 7008Contact AVCA
37 North Row
3rd Floor
London W1K 6DHChampioning Private Investment in Africa
The African Private Capital Association is the pan-African industry body 
which promotes and enables private investment in Africa.
AVCA plays an important role as a champion and effective change agent 
for the industry, educating, equipping and connecting members and 
stakeholders with independent industry research, best practice training 
programmes and exceptional networking opportunities.
With a global and growing member base, AVCA members span private 
equity and venture capital firms, institutional investors, foundations 
and endowments, pension funds, international development finance 
institutions, professional service firms, academia, and other associations.
This diverse membership is united by a common purpose: to be part of 
the Africa growth story.

Extracted from: End-of-Year-Report-2023---Ghana-Innovation-Journal.pdf
Ghana Startup & 
Innovation 
Ecosystem Report 
2023
GIJ– Ghana Innovation Journal
Bridging the data asymmetry gap between Startups, Investors, 
Development Partners and Corporates.  
@ghinnojournal
Image Credit: https://pexels.com/@kh -ali-li/2
Foreword 3
Key Insights 4
Funding Analysis: Overview 6 - 10
Ghana Agtech Startup Map 12 - 13
Funding Analysis: Top Deals 15 – 17 
Startup Spotlight 19 – 21 
Funding Analysis: Demography 23 – 27 
Funding Analysis: Capital Dynamics 29 – 35 
Impact of Startups 37 – 38 
Access to Finance 40 – 43 
Policy 45 – 46 
Challenges 48 – 49 Methodology 53
Dedication 54
About the Innovation Spark 55 – 56 TABLE OF CONTENT2023  was  challenging  not only  for Ghanaian  startups  but also  for the global  startup  ecosystem . The  hikes  in interest  rates  due  to inflation  by the United  
States  Federal  Reserve  ended  the era of cheap  money  since  investors  now  had  a less  risky  asset  class  to invest  in. Coupled  with  geopolitical  tension  in 
Europe  and  the Middle  East,  Ghana  also  experienced  the repercussions  of government  default  on its Eurobonds . Although  the business  environment  has 
deteriorated,  startups  have  shown  resilience .
As we step  into  2024 , we anticipate  three  things .
• An increased  pool  of local  funds :  The  fund -of-fund  investment  vehicles  championed  by the Venture  Capital  Trust  Fund,  Development  Bank  Ghana,  and  
Impact  Investing  Ghana  will hopefully  unlock  the needed  capital  for local  startups  to scale .
•A moderate  uptake  in electric  vehicles  (especially  2/3 wheelers) : As the government  plans  to incentivise  the use of electric  vehicles  (EVs),  there  might  
be a surge  in the use of electric  bikes . Speaking  to a key player  in the mobility  industry,  he revealed  that  switching  to EVS  has cut the cost  of his operation  
by at least  20%. This  has enabled  him  to keep  the delivery  fees  stable  since  2022 . The  tax waiver  is expected  to reduce  the acquisition  cost  of EVs,  which  
will ultimately  positively  impact  the e-commerce,  logistics  and  mobility  industry .  
•Support  to commercialize  research  and  innovation : The  Ministry  of Environment,  Science,  Technology  and  Innovation  is working  on a master  plan  to 
establish  and  operationalise  the Ghana  Innovation  and  Research  Commercialisation  Centre  to transform  research  output  and  innovations  into  industrial  
products  and  services  which  is currently  a challenge  in the country .
Here's  to another  year  of progress  within  Ghana's  dynamic  and  emerging  startup  ecosystem . Happy  reading!
Ammishaddai  Ofori
Co-Founder
The  Innovation  Spark
3
FOREWORD
Biggest industry
Agriculture and Food
Claimed 65% in funding (2023)Total funding raised
$65.7 million
69% year -on-year decline
Biggest deal
$15 million
Degas’ Series A and KOA’s Series B
Median ticket size
$120,000
Median funding size raised
M&A deals
2
Appruve and MicroEnsure's acquisition
Gender dynamics 
25%
Funding raised by Female CEOs
4
Ghana Innovation Ecosystem Report – Key Insights 
5
•FUNDING OVERVIEWFunding raised (in $ million) and deal count (in %).
Source: Gold Rush  Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) In 2023, Ghanaian startups raised $65.7 million (69% YoY decline) across 34 
funding rounds , suffering from the global market downturn.
6FUNDING ANALYSIS: OVERVIEW
Funding per quarter (in $ million).
                                    
             
  
            
         
                 
             
   
  
   
 
                    
                    
        FUNDING ANALYSIS: OVERVIEW
Ghana’s  69% annual decline in funding  reflects the realities of other startup 
ecosystems worldwide .
Source: Gold Rush Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) Most  Ghanaian  startups  are 
at the preseed  stage,  so it 
isn’t  surprising  that  most  
deals  were  below  the 
Series  A stage .
A whopping  24 preseed  
deals  were  mostly  raised  
from  accelerator  programs .
It is exciting  to see that  
three  startups  raised  a 
pre-Series  A round,  which  
implies  they  will soon  
achieve  product -market  fit, 
marking  the beginning  of 
the growth  stage  of their  
business .
Just  three  post -seed  deals  
were  witnessed . This  
includes  two  Series  A 
deals : Degas ’ $15 million  
round  and  Zeepay ’s $2 
million  round . The  cocoa  
upcycling  startup,  Koa,  
also  raised  a $15 million  
Series  B.Funding raised by stage ($ million).
8
                                                        
           
  
    
 
  
 
 
        
      
                 FUNDING ANALYSIS BY STAGE
51% of the funding was  early -stage, i.e. preseed to Pre -Series A .             
    
          
             
         
        
          
        
        
                                                                                                
   
  
   
   
     
        
     
    
    
    
     
 
 
 
 
 
9
FUNDING ANALYSIS BY INDUSTRY
Agritech  steals the spot as the most funded sector . Agritech funding saw a 
70% YoY growth.
Source: Gold Rush  Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) 1
2
3
4
52021 2022 H1 2023
Healthcare
Energy & Water
Fintech
Logistics & 
Transport
Agriculture & 
FoodTop 5
Fintech
Healthcare
Agriculture & 
Food
Logistics & 
Transport
Energy & WaterLogistics & 
Transport
Agriculture & 
Food
Healthcare
Fintech
Energy & WaterSince  2021 ,  agritech  has 
featured  notably  in the top 
5 funded  industries . The  
most  funded  startups  in 
the sector  include  Degas,  
Farmerline  and  Complete  
Farmer .
Healthcare  and  fintech  
sectors  have  grabbed  the 
most  funding . mPharma’s  
several  rounds  of funding  
constitute  a chunk  of the 
healthcare  industry's  
funding .  
In the Energy  and  water  
sector,  PEG’s  several  
rounds  constituted  the 
chunk  of funding  until  its 
exit  to Bboxx  last  year .
10
2023
Agriculture & 
Food
Logistics & 
Transport
Fintech
Retail & 
Commerce
HealthcareFUNDING ANALYSIS: TOP 5 INDUSTRIES
Agritech  has always featured in the top 5  industries and has now claimed the 
top spot. 
Source: Gold Rush  Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) 11
•AGTECH STARTUP MAP12
GHANA’S AGTECH STARTUP MAP
Farm Robotics, Mechanization & Equipment
 Agribusiness Marketplaces & Fintech
Novel Farming System
Ag Biotechnology
eGrocery /Online Restaurants and Meal Marketplaces
Farm Management Software, Sensing & IoT
Innovative Food Products
Source: Gold Rush  Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) With Agtech being the most funded sector for 2023, the startup map highlights the growing champions of the ecosystem. 
List not exhaustive
13
 Source: Ghana Innovation Journal Interview with Ecosystem Players(2023)
2023 Outlook & 2024 Expectations
For Complete  Farmer,  closing  our pre-series  A round  and  launching  our 
buyer  platform  were  big highlights . Some  Ghanaian  banks  were  more  
receptive  to startups . I must  mention  the work  of ABSA  Bank  and  the 
Mastercard  Foundation  Young  Africa  Works  program  that  supported  
startups  with  below -market  interest  rate  debt  financing  for growth . This  
was  a very  laudable  initiative  that  should  continue .
In 2024 , we will  hopefully  see more  funding  coming  to early -stage  
startups  in Ghana  as capital  markets  start  to bounce  back . Most  of this  
funding  will be focused  on “real”  impact -driven  solutions  in agriculture,  
logistics,  distribution  and  fintech .
Our  highlights  of 2023  was  the Technical  Assistance  we explored  with  
the Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC) . This support  aided  the 
development  of the Crowdfunding  guidelines  and  for us that's  the 
biggest  contribution  we made  to entrepreneurship  ecosystem  in Ghana  
whereby  small  and  growing  companies  will  be able  to leverage  
alternate  sources  to raise  capital .
For 2024  ,operationalizing  the Crowdfunding  guidelines  and  engaging  
the ecosystem  on its benefits  is what  we see through  the crystal  ball .2023 Outlook & 2024 Expectations
Desmond Koney
CEOClara Arthur
Consultant
INSIDER INSIGHTS14
•FUNDING OVERVIEW: TOP DEALS                  
                  
                        
                  
        
                  
          
                  
              
                            
          
          
          
         
         
         
         
       
       
                                                         
15
FUNDING ANALYSIS: TOP DEALS (I)
The $100,000+ deals span various industries, including Agtech, fintech, etc.
Source: Gold Rush  Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023), * Estimates 
*
                  
               
          
                  
               
                  
                  
        
                         
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
                                                            
16
FUNDING ANALYSIS: TOP DEALS (II)
The $100,000+ deals span various industries, including Agtech, fintech, etc.
Source: Gold Rush  Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023), *Estimate 
                  
                        
                  
                  
          
               
       
       
       
       
                                                            
17
FUNDING ANALYSIS: TOP DEALS (III)
The $100,000+ deals span various industries, including Agtech, fintech, etc.
Source: Gold Rush  Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023), *Estimate 
***
18
 Source: Ghana Innovation Journal Interview with Ecosystem Players(2023)2023 Outlook & 2024 Expectations
Since  we started  working  closely  with  entrepreneurs,  particularly  social  
entrepreneurs,  ten years  ago,  a recurring  theme  has  been  the need  for 
capital - both  financial  and  social . The  social  capital  aspect  of 
entrepreneurship  is about  the sharing  of experiences  between  
entrepreneurs  across  the whole  value  chain,  such  that  entrepreneurs  
build  confidence  and  a playbook  of what  works  and  what  doesn’t . 
Cataloguing  stories  of challenge  and  success  is something  we’re  
passionate  about  at Songhai  Advisory  because  we recognise  the gap  in 
‘institutional  memory’  and  the power  of collectivism . 
Some  of our highlights  in 2023  were  convening  conversations  around  
Bitcoin  as a solution  to currency  volatility,  remittance  corridors  and  
reputational  risk . INSIDER INSIGHTS
Kissy Agyeman -Togobo
Managing Partner
2023 Outlook & 2024 Expectations
We also  convened  an event  to bring  together  members  of the Ghanaian  
Diaspora  to discuss  the realities  of doing  business  here,  with  an 
emphasis  on the creative  industries . 
For us, 2024  means  building  on this  momentum  by strengthening  our 
understanding  of impact -orientated  businesses,  particularly  mission -
oriented  companies  committed  to sustainable  and  transformational  
impact  on the continent . This  is likely  to include  companies  that  meet  
the 2X Criteria,  companies  with  a climate  action  plan,  and  those  which  
are tech -enabled  and  food -systems  related .
19
•STARTUP SPOTLIGHT20
STARTUP SPOTLIGHT: COMPLETE FARMER
Complete  Farmer  digitizes  agriculture  from  supply  to demand  by 
connecting  all stakeholders  with  its end-to-end platform .
Source: 1. Pitchbook (2023), Compete Farmer profile, 2. TechCrunch (2023 ) Ghana’s Complete Farmer raise $$10m, Frontpage Afr ica (2023), Complete Farmer’s journey. Milestones•12,000 farmers across five key
regions inGhana .²
•Overseen the cultivation of over
30,000 acres of land, delivering
commodities to Asia, Europe and
other parts globally .²
•Grew revenue from $2.8million in
2021 to$5.3million in2022 and
anticipated toreach $7.5million in
2023 .²
Funding
history•Total disclosed funding :$12.55
million .
•$10.4mPre-Series A
•$2mSeed
•0.15kPreseed
Selected
Investor (s)Founder(s) •Desmond Koney (CEO)
Industry •Agtech
Founding Year •2018
Stage •Pre-Series A
Business model •B2B
Employees No.•49¹
Geographic
reach•Ghana ;expanding toTogo .²
About•Complete Farmer isan end -to-end
platform for the key stakeholders in
the agriculture value chain .The
marketplace startup has built a
platform that balances the needs of
growers, vendors and buyers .Founding story
•Desmond Koney started Complete
Farmer after the two -year sojourn on
the farm he inherited from his late
father .His failure tooperate the farm
led toexploring the agriculture value
chain and itschallenges .The desire to
address these challenges led to the
creation ofComplete Farmer .
•After participating in the Kosmos
Incubation program ,hebuilt the MVP
and raised funding from the incubator
for the first iteration ofthe business, a
crowdfunding platform forfarmers .
•Complete Farmer executed itssolution
until the pandemic, which disrupted the
operations ofcrowdfunding businesses,
leading to scalability and payment
default issues .
21
STARTUP SPOTLIGHT: JETSTREAM AFRICA
Jetstream  Africa  is transforming  the freight  forwarding  landscape  by 
offering  an end-to-end solution  for cargo  movement . 
Source: 1. Techcrunch  (    ) G    ’                  $       Techcrunch  (2023) Jetstream takes -in-13m -equity, Techpoint  (2021) Ghana -based Jetstream raises $3mMilestones•Jetstream grew its trade finance
portfolio from the $1million debt it
secured inmid -2021 to about $9
million intotal loans .²
•Revenue has grown 48%,and active
customers 102% within the past
year .²
Funding
history•Total disclosed funding :$16.1
million .
•$13mPre-Series A
•$3mSeed
•$0.11mGrant
Selected
Investor (s)Founder(s)•Miishe Addy (CEO)
•Solomon Torgbor (COO)
Industry •Logistics
Founding Year •2018
Stage •Pre-Series A
Business model •B2B
Employees No.•44¹
Geographic
reach•Present in29countries, including 12
African markets .²
About•Jetstream isan e-logistics vertically
integrated company that provides
cross -border trade solutions that ease
exports across Africa through its
technology -enabled freight
forwarding, trade financing and
insurance, and cargo tracking tools for
African businesses .Founding story
•Jetstream Africa was founded in2018
byMiishe Addy and Solomon Torgbo .
•Prior to Jetstream, Miishe was a
Business Teaching Fellow atMeltwater
Entrepreneurial School ofTechnology
(MEST) .Before MEST, she worked for
Bain & Company, while Solomon
worked atMaersk’s freight forwarding
subsidiary Damco .
•Jetstream started as a logistics
company for cosmetics manufacturers
inSouth Africa .Later, itpivoted toa
less -than -container -load model to
aggregate shipments insmall quantities
that cannot occupy the whole
container .In2020 ,itexpanded its
offerings byproviding trade finance to
customers .Currently, itprovides end -
to-end solutions for the freight
forwarding ecosystem .
22
 Source: Ghana Innovation Journal Interview with Ecosystem Players(2023)
2023 Outlook & Expectations
In 2023 , in partnership  with  Absa  Bank,  we ran a series  of Technical  
Assistance  Workshops,  including  the Value  Chain  Huddle  that  brought  
over  200 Fintech  and  Agriculture  value  chain  players  together  to discuss  
solutions  to the challenges  in the value  chains . Similarly,  we held  the 
Edtech  Stakeholder  Forum  in partnership  with  the Mastercard  
Foundation,  bringing  over  100  stakeholders  into  the Edtech  dialogue . 
We had  a series  of events  that  providentially  worked  together  quite  
beautifully . First  was  a 3-day  Web  3 workshop,  which  was  followed  by a 
6-week  pilot  bootcamp  partnership  with  the Mastercard  Foundation,  
and  then  came  the Absa  Hacks  Web  3 Hackathon . All these  just  seemed  
to be the perfect  preparation  for the eCedi  Hackathon  with  EMTECH  and  
the Bank  of Ghana . 
Our  flagship  Training  Program  minted  five  new  startups  that  are now  
thriving  in our incubator,  bringing  their  products  to the market
Web  3 technology  is gently  warming  its way  into  the ecosystem ; we 
think  the eCedi  will  be rolled  out,  launching  the country  into  a new  era 
of e-commerce  and  payment  systems  innovation  - this  may  prove  to be 
disruptive . 
ChatGPT  took  the world  by storm  and  overshadowed  all other  AI work,  
but I see other  fields  of AI coming  to the fore  in 2024  but not with  the 
bang  that  ChatGPT  did. Other  LLM  (Large  Language  Models)  
innovations  will  also  hit the market
Edtech  is another  space  to watch,  we held  our first  Edtech  Stakeholder  
Forum  in August  2024 , CENDLOS  (Center  for Distance  Learning  and  
Open  Schooling)  held  theirs  2 weeks  after   both  with  massive  
attendance  especially  from  government  departments . I see a big wave  
in Edtech  update  starting  in 20242024 ExpectationsINSIDER INSIGHTS
Olufemi Adewumi
Programs Director
23
•FUNDING ANALYSIS: DEMOGRAPHY24
FUNDING ANALYSIS: DEMOGRAPHY
Although it is still a “man’s world”, funding to female CEOs surged from 8% in 
2022 to 25%  in 2023.  
Source: Gold Rush  Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) Funding raised by CEO’s gender (%). Composition of founding team (%). Education background of CEOs (%).In 2023 , a noteworthy  
paradigm  shift  was  
observed  in the funding  
landscape . Female  CEOs  
notably  secured  25% of 
the total  funding,  marking  a 
significant  surge  from  the 
8% recorded  in 2022 . 
Meanwhile,  male  CEOs  
maintain  a majority  share  
at 75%, a deliberate  
deviation  from  the 92% 
dominance  observed  in 
2022 .
The  paradigm  shift  was  also  
observed  in the 
demographics  of teams  
funded . Gender -diverse  
teams  secured  26% of the 
total  funding,  substantially  
increasing  from  the 9% 
reported  in the preceding  
year . 
                              
      
                              
      
                              
      Male
Fem aleMale -only teams
Gender -diverse teamsLocally educated
Foreign -educated25
For every dollar invested,  Female CEOs raised $0.25 . Female -only teams 
raised $0.0 .
Source: Gold Rush  Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) 
Female CEOs
Male CEOs$0.25
$0.75
Gender diverse teams
Male -only teamsFemale -only teams
$0.26
$0.74$0.00
Locally -educated CEOs
Foreign -educated CEOs$0.25
$0.75FUNDING ANALYSIS: DEMOGRAPHYSource: Gold Rush Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) 26FUNDING ANALYSIS: FEMTASTIC
Miishe  Addy
$13 m
Pre -Series A
LOGISTICS
Natalie Narh$0.2 m 
PreseedJOBTECH
Diana Owusu -Kyerko$2.6 m
PreseedCOMMERCE
Maame   Abrema  Quarm$0.12 m 
PreseedFINTECH
Shobhita SoorUndisclosed
PreseedAGTECH
Marie -Reine SeshieUndisclosed
PreseedCOMMERCE
Augusta AddyUndisclosed
PressedCOMMERCEThese  female CEOs raised over $16 million in funding to accelerate their 
businesses. 
Valerie LarbiUndisclosed
SeedMOBILITY
27
FUNDING ANALYSIS : LOCAL FOUNDERS
Most local founders who raised capital graduated from the University of 
Ghana  or KNUST .
Source: Gold Rush  Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) 
Applied 
science
35%
Basic science
10%Business
35%Social science
20%University attended by locally -trained CEOs (%).Academic majors of locally -trained CEOs (%).67% of the local  founders  
who  raised  investments  
studied  at the University  
of Ghana  and  Kwame  
Nkrumah  University  of 
Science  and  Technology .
45% also  have  a STEM  
degree  in Engineering,  
Biotechnology,  Physics,  
and   Mathematics .  A 
sizeable  number  also  have  
business  degrees  in 
subjects  such  as Business  
Administration,  
Accounting,  Banking,  
Finance  and  Insurance . 
                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28
 Source: Ghana Innovation Journal Interview with Ecosystem Players(2023)
2023 Outlook & Expectations
2023  was  a challenging  yet transformative  period . The  economic  
downturn  presented  numerous  hurdles ; escalating  exchange  rates,  
soaring  fuel  costs,  and  increased  prices  for goods  and  services  impacted  
our operational  expenses . The  industry  saw  the entry  of global  players,  
intensifying  competition  in last -mile  logistics . ShaQ  Express  thrived  
amidst  these  evolving  dynamics . 
Our  focus  on connecting  vendors  and  customers  through  a seamless  
digital  platform  proved  invaluable .  Using  electric  motorcycles  for 
package  delivery  was  a significant  step  towards  sustainability . A 
standout  achievement  in 2023  was  the launch  of our electric  bikes —a 
milestone  made  possible  through  insights  gained  from  GCIC,  Orange  
Corners  and  ABSA/MasterCard  Foundation . We successfully  increased  
our EV fleet  to 29. 
Looking  ahead  to 2024 , the e-commerce  and  logistics  sector  is poised  
for significant  transformation . There’s  potential  for expansion,  not just  
geographically  but also  in service  diversification . The  integration  of 
more  localized  and  personalized  services  could  be a game -changer .
As global  awareness  of environmental  issues  rises,  more  companies  
will  likely  adopt  sustainable  practices . For ShaQ  Express,  this  could  
mean  expanding  our fleet  of electric  vehicles  and  exploring  renewable  
energy  sources  in operations . 
We also  look  forward  to strategic  partnerships,  with  fintech  companies  
or local  artisans,  that  could  open  new  avenues  for growth  and  
community  impact . The  hardships  we anticipate  are seen  as catalysts  
for creative  problem -solving  and  adaptation  within  our industry .2024 ExpectationsINSIDER INSIGHTS
Anthony Owusu -Ansah
CEO
29
•FUNDING ANALYSIS: CAPITAL DYNAMICS30
FUNDING ANALYSIS: SOURCE OF CAPITAL
Venture Capital continues to be the primary funding source for startups. 
These funders backed startups that provide solutions to businesses .
Source: Gold Rush  Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) Although  98% (20 deals)  of 
the funding  was  raised  
from  venture  capital  firms,  
incubators  and  
accelerators  funded  2% of 
the deals  (14 deals) .
As inflation  wiped  out the 
consumption  power  of 
Ghanaians,  it is not 
surprising  to see VCs 
turning  to companies  
which  mostly  provide  
solutions  to other  
businesses .  Hybrid
5%
B2C
7%B2B
88%Funding raised by source (%). Funding raised by business model (%).
Incubator & 
Accelerator
2%
Venture Capital
98%31
FUNDING ANALYSIS: INVESTOR LEAGUE TABLE
Techstars  and MEST Africa were Ghanaian startups' leading international 
and local investors.
Source: Gold Rush  Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) 
                                                       G                          
                 G                                                                
                    
                                                        
                                                 
                
                    
                          
                                  
             
          
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
G      
G    
G    
       
       
  
G    
G    
G    
G                                                    
32
MERGERS & ACQUISITIONS
Ghanaian companies are  targets for buyers expanding to the West Africa 
region.
Source: Gold Rush  Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) 
G    
G    
       
     Country Seller Buyer Country33
 Source: Ghana Innovation Journal interview with CEO (2023)
What  motivated  you to sell Appruve,  and 
how  did you ensure  it aligned  with  your  
company's  long -term  vision?
I always  haven't  had  that  perspective  that  "your  startup  is your  baby" . I 
care  about  what  I build,  but when  starting  a business,  there  are usually  
three  ultimate  goals : a. To build  a cash  flow  or lifestyle  business ; b. To be 
acquired,  or c. To IPO or list on the stock  exchange .
So that's  how  I've always  perceived  any  business  I've done  including  
Appruve . And  so, for me,  ultimately,  with  that  in mind  if you're  building  a 
company,  you're  positioning  it for one  of these  things . For a long  time,  
we've  always  positioned  Appruve  to be acquired  so we're  happy  we have  
achieved  that  goal,  and  it came  in time .
Mergers  and  Acquisitions  involve  a lot of processes . It starts  way  before  
the actual  event  of acquisition  happens . Luckily,  we had  already  built  a 
relationship  with  Smile  at the beginning  of our company . And  so, we 
understood  that  preparing  for an exit  event  means  establishing  a 
possible  relationship  with  would -be acquirers . We built  and  developed  
the partnership  to see how  we could  work  together . This  was  one  of the 
things  we did to initiate  the acquisition  process  eventually . The  
transaction  itself  took  about  a year  to get done . 
•The  first  process  is for the founders  to agree  to be acquired  and  
agree  on the terms . 
•Then  discuss  that  with  your  investors  and  agree  on the terms . As a pioneer  in your  industry  with  a 
successful  exit,  what  crucial  steps  did 
you take  to prepare  your  company  for 
acquisition?THE ART OF EXITING WITH PAUL DAMALIE
We sat down with the ex -CEO of Appruve Inc. to discuss his journey of founding and selling his business. 34
 Source: Ghana Innovation Journal interview with CEO (2023)
•Once  you  establish  what  you  seek  in a deal,  the broader  stakeholders  
will  be engaged .
•You  must  search  for an acquisition  lawyer  with  industry  experience . It 
costs  a lot of money . The  acquisition  lawyer  helps  with  all the 
documentation . 
Since  we had  the holding  company  in the US and  operating  companies  
across  Africa,  there  was  a lot of documentation  on both  ends . Once  you  
hire  the lawyers,  the lawyers  will  take  you  through  all the 
documentation  necessary  to meet  regulatory  compliance  to meet  the 
internal  diligence  processes . It was  one  of the most  stressful  times  in my 
life because  we did a lot of work,  signing  almost  100 documents  to 
complete  the acquisition . The  process  was  a great  learning  process,  and  
it was  worth  it.
•In terms  of challenges,  as I alluded  to, the biggest  challenge  in the 
beginning  was  the cost  of the transaction . Quality  transaction  
lawyers  cost  money . Sometimes,  it can  be more  than  $100 ,000. 
•I also  made  sure  the transaction  wasn't  complex . It was  a new  thing  
to me,  and  spending  so much  time  reviewing  almost  100 legal  
documents  whilst  keeping  business  operations  going  was  a 
challenge,  but we managed  to overcome  it. 
•Another  challenge  was  our initial  decision  as founders  to exit . When  
investors  hear  you  are being  acquired  unless  the exit  value  is like 
100x of their  investment,  which  wasn't  the case  in our situation,  
there  would  be some  reservations . So, in the beginning,  there  were  
some  reservations,  but we managed  to convince  them  and  get them  
to our side .Can you share  any specific  challenges  
you encountered  during  the selling  
process,  and how  you overcame  them?THE ART OF EXITING WITH PAUL DAMALIE35
 Source: Gold Rush  Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) 
What  role did your  team  play  in the 
successful  M&A  exit,  and how  did you 
ensure  they  remained  motivated  and 
focused  during  the transition?
This  is an excellent  question . One  of the things  that  happens  when  you  
are in the process  of selling  or getting  acquired  is that  there's  a tendency  
to lose  focus . So, we prioritised  getting  the cofounders  to own  various  
functions  of either  running  the company  or running  the acquisition  
process . 
For instance,  Kwame,  our Head  of Product,  was  responsible  for liaising  
with  the compliance  team  to make  all the compliance  documents  
available . Usually,  during  the acquisition  phase,  compliance  is a big 
deal . Laud,  the CTO,  was  responsible  for managing  infrastructure  
products  and  ensuring  the business  ran smoothly . While  I did the 
potential  acquirer  seeking,  initiating  talks,  etc. That  is how  we broke  
down  the functions  among  ourselves .
After  we announced  our deal,  I had  a bunch  of founders  reach  out to me 
who  were  either  potentially  going  to acquire  competitors  or getting  
acquired . I first  asked  them  if they  had  established  a working  
relationship . If you  haven't  established  any  working  partnership  or 
relationship,  I wouldn't  advise  you  to rush  in. In such  situations,  there  
might  be much  misalignment . 
So, if you  can  work  together  for 6 to 12 months,  you  get to understand  
the business,  know  the deal  breakers,  etc. This  will  give  you  more  
information . This  will  put you  in a better  place  to negotiate,  and  then  
valuation  comes  in later . So first  think  about  the working  relationship . 
How  are we going  to make  this  possible?  Once  you  have  established  
that,  over  some  time,  there's  an opportunity  to consider  what  the 
valuation  will  be based  on, company  performance,  and  other  factors .What  advice  would  you offer  to other  
founders  considering  selling  their  
company,  especially  when  valuing  their  
business?THE ART OF EXITING WITH PAUL DAMALIE3
6
Source: Gold Rush  Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) 
Did you encounter  any cultural  or 
regulatory  hurdles  while  dealing  with  a 
foreign  company,  and how  did you 
navigate  them?
There  were  regulatory  hurdles . As a business  with  a holding  in San  
Francisco  and  a presence  across  the continent,  we are regulated  in all 
these  markets  and  must  meet  regulatory  requirements . So, for a very  
long  time,  we had  planned  to announce  the deal  when  we had  finished  
the due  diligence  with  the US entity . We were  done  with  the US entity's  
acquisition  process,  but we couldn't . We sent  a notice  to the Bank  of 
Ghana . They  had  certain  concerns,  and  so we needed  to address  them . 
In terms  of cultural  differences,  there  weren't  many  barriers . However,  
being  a smaller  startup,  we faced  some  challenges . For instance,  during  
our early  days,  we were  invited  to attend  meetings  in London,  but trips  
were  not in out budget . We had  to prioritize  and  conserve  our funds  for 
more  crucial  expenses .THE ART OF EXITING WITH PAUL DAMALIE
Paul Damalie
Ex CEO, Appruve Inc .•IMPACT OF STARTUPS
3738
IMPACT OF FUNDED STARTUPS
Startups could be a major source of employment . The funded startups 
collectively employ over 1,200 people.
Source: PitchBook  Profile of Companies (2023), Gold Rush  Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) 
     
        
      
      
          
   
               
         
               
    G   
    
        
               
       
      
    
             
      
     G     
           
               
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  Company # of employeesIn a tough  funding  
environment,  companies  
are being  mindful  of their  
expansionary  activities . 
Most  companies  are 
focused  on cutting  costs  to 
extend  their  runway . 
During  the year  review,  
most  companies  expanded  
within  the West  African  
subregion . Farmerline  and  
Zeepay  set up shops  in 
Cote  D’Ivoire,  Wahu  
Mobility  in Togo,  and  
Jetstream  in Nigeria . 
 IT Consortium  and  
Zeepay  are also  looking  
towards  the East  African  
market . 
39
Rwanda
Cote D’Ivoire
Nigeria
Gambia
Togo
Zambia
Startups are deepening their presence within the West Africa subregion to 
expand their addressable market.TECH EXPANSION MAP
Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) 40
 Source: Ghana Innovation Journal Interview with Ecosystem Players(2023)
2023 Outlook & 2024 Expectations
2023  was  an eventful  year  for us. For Aya,  in 2024 ;
•We will  launch  the EthDev  Africa  Hacker  House  in Ghana,  a physical  
space  for our builders  to learn,  connect,  and  work  on their  solutions .
•We will have  Pop  Hacker  Houses,  which  will  serve  as spaces  for our 
hackathons  in Nigeria  (EthDevLagos , EthDevAbuja  and  EthDevJos ) 
and  Ghana  (EthDevAccra )
•We will  also  launch  the 3rd and  4th cohorts  of AyaVersity , with  a 
target  of 100 builders  per cohort .
• More  protocols  like  Ethereum,  Optimsm , Base,  Arbitrum , Linear,  
ZKsync , and  more  will  double  down  their  activation  in Africa .
•Its a year  for Layer  2's emergence ; staking  and  restaking  will  be top 
on the fly.
•The  Decentralized  Physical  Infrastructure  Network  (DEPIN)  will  be 
the key driver  for crypto  and  blockchain  technology  adoption .
•ETFs  and  stablecoins  will  become  more  topical  issues,  with  a lot of 
mainstream  fintech  adopting  the tech  to move  value  borderlessly .
•Onchain  reputation  will become  the key to the proof  of humanity  in 
the Web 3 space .
•Nigeria  has  set the tone  for critical  mass  adoption . I think  the 
approach  with  a private -focused  consortium  is more  likely  to 
succeed  than  a government -led CBDC .2024 PredictionsEric Annan
CEOINSIDER INSIGHTS
41
•ACCESS TO FINANCE42
ACCESS TO FINANCE 
Source: Venture Capital Trust Fund (2023), Impact Investing Ghana (2023), Gold Rush  Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) 
Venture Capital Trust Fund
         
     
                                        $  
                       
                                   $  
                                        
                             $             
            
        G                 
                        
                
         G                         01 02 Ci-Gaba Funds of Funds
         
     
                                                 
                                     
           
                                  
                              
                Local initiatives like the VCTF and Ci -Baba fund of funds will hopefully 
unlock more capital sources for startups.43
ACCESS TO FINANCE 
The Africa Growth Fund, which  invests in Africa -focused funds, and the YESS 
Fund , which provides working capital, are timely interventions. 
Source: Ghana Chamber of Young Entrepreneurs (2023): YESS Fund, Mastercard Foundation Africa Growth Fund (2023), Innovation S park Analytics (2023) Africa Growth Fund
         
     
                                                
                              
                                  
                         
            
              
                
                          03 04 YESS Fund
         
     
                                               
                                      
    G                     
                      
                  
44
ACCESS TO FINANCE 
International development finance institutions like DEG  and British 
International Investment  are also intervening to bridge the funding gap.  
Source: Ghana Chamber of Young Entrepreneurs (2023): YESS Fund, Mastercard Foundation Africa Growth Fund (2023), Innovation S park Analytics (2023) develoPPP  Ventures
         
     
                                           
                                        
                                
                                   
                         
                               
                       
 G          
            
           
           
                05 06 Growth Investment Partners
         
     
         G                                      
                  $        $           
                 
                                       
                                
                
45
 Source: Ghana Innovation Journal Interview with Ecosystem Players(2023)2023 Outlook & 2024 Expectations
Reflecting  on 2023 , the ecosystem  is very  ripe  and  doesn't  seem  to be 
slowing  down  anytime  soon . We need  to align  to ensure  that  it continues  
to grow  rapidly  and  that  the financial  ecosystem  is aligned . So, 
entrepreneurs  know  the various  financial  instruments  and  funds  on the 
market .
Regarding  2024 , we forecast  that  there  will be even  more  opportunities  
for entrepreneurs  and  investment  firms  to collaborate . We have  started  
doing  some  training  in the areas  of gender,  technology  etc. We also  host  
deal  rooms  and  mixers  so that  entrepreneurs  can  engage  with  specific  
investors  and  pitch  directly  to them . Ghana  is ready  for business  and  all 
entrepreneurs  should  be prepared  for whatever  platform  they  find  
themselves  because  you  never  know  when  that  opportunity  will  arise  to 
meet  that  investors .INSIDER INSIGHTS
Hannah Bertilla  
CEO
46
•POLICIES47
POLICIES & REGULATIONS
Apart from the startup bill that has still not been tabled for discussion  in 
parliament, the startup ecosystem chalked a few policy wins .
Source: Ministry of Energy (2023): EV Policy; Securities and Exchange Commission (2023): Crowdfunding GuidelinesCROWDFUNDING GUIDELINES DRAFT
• With  technical  support  from  the UN Capital  Development  Fund , 
the Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  released  a draft  version  
of the crowdfunding  guidelines,  which  has been  in the works  for 
about  two  years . 
• The  guidelines  outline  regulations  for various  aspects  of 
crowdfunding . The  outline  includes  the process  of applying  for a 
Crowdfunding  Intermediary  license,  the responsibilities  of such  
intermediaries,  the involvement  of crowdfunding  participants,  
transaction -related  requirements,  obligations  for issuers,  activity  
restrictions , and  additional  criteria  for soft  commodities  digital  
investment  platforms .ELECTRIC VEHICLE POLICY
• Ghana’s  new  Electric  Vehicle  (EV)  Policy  was  launched  to create  
an enabling  environment  for the uptake  of electric  vehicles . 
• The  Policy  will be implemented  in three  phases . The  preparatory  
phase  (2024 -2026 ) will address  the challenges  and  barriers  to EV 
uptake . Phase  2 (2027  – 2035 ) will ensure  the take -off and  
transition  to EVs with  a targeted   EV penetration  rate  of 35%. For 
the final  phase  (2036  – 2045 ), efforts  will be made  to ensure  that,  
by 2045 , no new  petrol  or diesel  vehicles  will be sold  or imported  
into  Ghana .
• Additionally,  the government  announced  its plans  to exempt  
electric  vehicles  for public  transportation  from  import  duties  for 
eight  years , extend  the same  benefit  to registered  EV assembly  
companies  for both  semi -knocked  down  and  completely  knocked  
down  electric  cars,  and  continue  the zero  rate  of VAT  on locally  
assembled  vehicles  for an additional  two  years .48
 Source: Ghana Innovation Journal Interview with Ecosystem Players(2023)
2023 Outlook & 2024 Expectations
In 2023 , our debut  year,  we witnessed  impressive  traction  across  our 
target  sectors : Education,  Engineering,  Corporate,  and  Entertainment . 
This  momentum  began  with  fruitful  collaborations  with  the Society  of 
Petroleum  Engineers,  Ghana  section,  notably  at the SPE  Africa  Students  
Congress  and  the Free  Short  Course . Additionally,  our CTO,  Caleb  
achieved  global  validation  within  the gaming  industry  by being  chosen  
as the only  African  mentee  in the 2023  International  Game  Developers  
Association  cohort . 
We also  emerged  victorious  at the National  Entrepreneurship  and  
Innovations  Program  Presidential  Pitch  contest  and  won  the "Best  
Animation/Gaming"  startup  at the Association  of Ghanaian  Start -up 
Awards .
Looking  ahead,  2024  ushers  in exciting  ventures . We aim  to bring  our 
products  to market :
•Our  engineering  simulation  environment  program  will  be introduced  
to various  universities .
•Our  VR game  will  debut  on the Oculus  store .
Furthermore,  we anticipate  fruitful  partnerships  with  organizations  
seeking  to integrate  cutting -edge  technologies  into  their  operations .2024 ExpectationsINSIDER INSIGHTS
Nicholas Abakah  Eshun
CEO
49
•CHALLENGES50
GLOOMY MOMENT
The macroeconomic  uncertainties  pose a significant challenge for startups.   
Source: IMF Database (2023), Ghana Statistical Service (2023), World Bank Governance Indicators (20223)
                    
        
                                                   
               
     
     
                   
                                              
                      
              Inflation rate (2021 – 2023) Exchange rate ( GHS/USD, 2021 – 2023) 
2021 31/12/2023
                                                     
         
      
      
   
         
GDP Growth rate (2014 – 2025) Regulatory quality (Percentile rank, 2000 – 2022) 
                                    
        
      
      
        
      
        
G            51
GLOOMY MOMENT
The tough business environment forced some companies to shut down 
while others downsized . 
Source: Daba  Finance (2023): Dash shuts down, Techcabal  (2023): mPharma  lays off 150, Techpoint  Africa (2023): Chipper Cash lays off again, Tiny Reusers  (2023)52
•TRENDS TO WATCH53
 Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2023) PREDICITONS/TRENDS TO WATCH
These trends  point to a bustling future for the startup ecosystem in Ghana
Moderate interest in Electric Vehicle
• With  the waiver  of import  duties  on EVs,  we 
anticipate  a moderate  uptake  of EVs (especially  
2/3 wheelers .
• We also  anticipate  a pool  of sustainability -
focused  asset  financing  schemes  to help  users  
purchase  EVs. 
Funding Debacle
• Although  new  funding  sources  will be 
available,  it is unlikely  that  startup  funding  will 
return  to the 2020  level  of $ 100 million . With  
Ghana’s  deteriorated  macro -environment  and  
an increased  risk  premium,  investors  will likely  
be on the fence  to deploy  funds . 
 Commercializing research
• The  Ministry  of Environment,  Science,  
Technology  and  Innovation  is actively  working  
to operationalize  the Ghana  Innovation  and  
Research  Commercialization  Centre(GIRC) . 
• The  GIRC  Centre  will act as a collaborator  to 
drive  research  and  support  the transformation  of 
research  output  and  innovations  into  industrial  
products  and  services . Increased pool of local funds 
• The  fund -of-fund  investment  vehicles  
championed  by the Venture  Capital  Trust  Fund,  
Development  Bank  Ghana,  and  Impact  Investing  
Ghana  will provide  Ghana -domiciled  funds  with  
the needed  capital  to back  startups  and  SMEs .
• In 2022  and  2023 , we witnessed  few  cross -
investments  by private  equity  firms  in tech  
startups .
Artificial Intelligence Policy
• The  government  is looking  to regulate  the use of 
artificial  intelligence,  with  the policy  draft  ready  
to be tabled  before  the Cabinet  for 
consideration .
• AI evolves  rapidly,  and  regulations  may  struggle  
to keep  pace  with  the speed  of technological  
advancements . Moreover,  creating  regulations  
in a country  without  the fundamentals  might  
stifle  innovation .Rise in Venture Migration
• There  is a subtle  trend  of Ghanaian  startups  
moving  to other  Africa  countries,  especially  
Nigeria,  where  they  believe  it is relatively  easy  to 
access  capital . 
• There  should  be concerted  efforts  by 
stakeholders  to fund  startups  or provide  
avenues  to get funded . 
Positive trend Negative trend Neutral trend54
•METHODOLOGY55
METHODOLOGY
•The  Ghana  Innovation  Journal  Report  H1 2023  is based  on data  gathered  by 
the media  arm  of The  Innovation  Spark  for the first  half  of 2023 . 
•The  data  collected,  analyzed,  and  presented  in our research  came  from  two  
sources : 
•Desk -based  research : data  from  the public,  i.e., products,  features,  and  
funding  publicly  announced  by ecosystem  stakeholders . 
•Interviews : Key  actors  were  also  interviewed  to validate  the data . We 
were  privileged  to be informed  of confidential  deals  due  to our 
relationship  with  various  entities . 
•The  startups  considered  in the report  are either  technology  or tech -enabled,  
which  have  raised  at least  $10,000 in equity  or debt  in 2022 . 
•For the fundraising  analysis,  we only  cover  Ghanaian  startups . We define  these  
as startups  whose  primary  or foundation  market  after  launching  is Ghana  or 
whose  headquarters  is in Ghana . 
•The  report  is not exhaustive,  and  its goal  is to provide  a picture  of the current  
state  of the Ghanaian  startup  ecosystem  and  map  how  it evolves .•Considering  the opaque  nature  of the Ghanaian  
market,  we strive  to constantly  update  our data  to 
maintain  accuracy . If you  spot  an error  or 
inaccuracy,  please  email  
reports@theinnovationspark .com .
•Any  part  of this  publication  may  be copied,  
translated  into  other  languages  or adapted  to meet  
local  needs  without  prior  permission  from  the 
Innovation  Spark,  provided  the work  is 
appropriately  cited . Scope and Methodology Data and assurance integrity
56
DEDICATION57
THE INNOVATION SPARK PROFILE
BUSINESS ADVISORY
& CONSULTING
We design and implement innovation 
programs for corporations, donors, 
hubs, and accelerators.
This includes defining the program 
and recruiting consultants, startups, 
and partner institutions.
This include  include early -stage 
incubation, growth -stage acceleration 
and thematic boot camps.Enterprise Support Services
Startup Support Services
We provide ideation, coaching and 
implementation services for 
entrepreneurs and innovative 
ventures across the continent. This 
ranges from opportunity mapping, 
and market entry to incorporation 
and recruitment.INVESTMENT 
FACILITATION
We proactively source innovative 
companies and support angel 
investor networks and venture capital 
firms looking for viable startups that 
fit their investment thesis across both 
tech and non -tech fields.Venture Scouting
Investor Readiness Services
We provide investor readiness boot 
camps directly and through our 
partner programs. Our unique 
methodologies involve a 360 
assessment of their financials, tech 
stack, operational management, 
team structure, etc. to position them 
for investment.DIGITAL CONTENT
& MEDIA PRODUCTION
We create and curate sought -after 
content that provides exposure to 
ecosystems and startups. 
We advise on the creation of various 
digital content across a range of social 
media platforms, from traditional to 
digital media.Digital Content
Media Production
We invest in creative projects. We 
are the executive producers in a 
range of media and fashion 
productions, including music, 
fashion shows, movies and TV series.
57BESPOKE 
SERVICES
Our innovation research products help 
companies and individuals identify on -
the-ground realities, trends and 
opportunities in innovation.
Our detailed database provides insights 
into the dynamics of early -stage 
financing in Ghana and the continent.
We provide bespoke industry, product 
and user market research.Innovation Research
Stakeholder Engagement
Our rich network of partners 
positions us to facilitate B2B 
meetings, product activations and 
client & partner identification. This 
includes strategic introductions, 
meet & greet sessions and round 
table events with key stakeholders 
in the ecosystem.We offer tailor -made consultation, media services and business 
development for entrepreneurial ventures.58
PAST REPORTS
Our data -driven reports aim to provide insightful perspectives to founders  
and ecosystem players .
Click to access 
previous 
reportsThe Ghana Innovation Journal is a product of The Innovation Spark
59www.theinnovationspark.com  | reports@theinnovationspark.com
  
@ghinnojournal 


Extracted from: Ghana-Innovation-Ecosystem-Report-2022-Year-in-Review.pdf
Ghana Innovation Ecosystem Report 
2022: Year in Review
iBlitz –Ghana Innovation Journal
Bridging the data asymmetry gap between Startups, Investors, Development 
Partners and Corporates.
“One of the critical elements of a successful 
digital ecosystem is recorded wins.”
Ada Sowho
Chief Marketing Officer
MTN Nigeria
01Executive 
Summary
03Investment 
Trends
-T otal Investment
-Gender Dynamics
-Spotlight: Female founder 
-Stage Dynamics
-T op Deals
-M&A Activities02Ghana 
Startup 
Ecosystem 
Landscape
-Enabling Factors
-The Ecosystem 
Landscape
-The Startup Landscape
04Access to 
Capital  
-New Investment 
Vehicles
-Spotlight:  Angel 
Investor
05Milestones 
& Traction
-Market Expansion
-Traction & Milestone
06 Policy
 -Policy Review
07Talent on 
the move
-Local Appointments
-Diaspora Moves
08Trends to 
Watch/ 
Predictions
Table of 
Content
TheGhana Innovation Journal Ghana Report 2022 highlights theincredible growth oftheecosystem .Theyear began enthusiastically, with
startups raising over USD 55million inJanuary .Ourtracker estimates thatGhana -based startups raised $212million (equity, debt andgrants) .
While fintech remains thedominant sector, themost significant raise fortheyearwasmPharma's (ahealthtech) $35million .Ghana maintained
itsposition asthe5thventure capital market inAfrica .Thegender dynamic infundraising wasappalling ;8%oftheinvestment raised went to
female -ledstartups .
TheInnovation Spark team hasmaintained amulti-prong approach when engaging intheinnovation scene over thelastfewyears .Thisincludes
hosting andparticipating instartup programs, establishing innovation hubs, launching programs, running accelerators andengaging awide array of
stakeholders through theGhana Innovation Journal .Over thelasttwoyears, wehave been privileged tojournal and“record wins” within the
ecosystem .
The2022 report seeks toenlighten andeducate various stakeholders about theemerging startup scene, from thefounding journeys ofmultiple
startups toemerging tech hubs across thecountry .Wealsoprovide anoverview ofthelandscape oftheecosystem actors ranging from
investors, accelerators, anddevelopment partners tomedia .
Within theyear,startups scaled toatleast eleven countries toexpand their addressable market .Zeepay ,forinstance, launched intheCaribbean
totapintotheestimated US$7billion remittance market intheregion .Various universities andgovernment agencies areexploring programs that
would significantly change thelandscape .Forinstance, theMinistry ofCommunication andDigitalization ischampioning theStartup Bill,while the
Securities Exchange Commission backs theequity crowdfunding act.In2022,atleast twoentrepreneurs, T om Chris (SFAN) andSamBaadoo
(Fleri)spotlighted ontheNew Y orkTimes Square Nasdaq MarketSite .
Asanecosystem enabler, weaimtohighlight thesignificant accomplishments ofGhanaians both athome andinthediaspora .Ourmission isto
spark conversations andempower investors byproviding clear, timely andobjective dataontheecosystem .
Weencourage youtoshare thereport withanyone seeking insights andletusknow your thoughts about thevarious topics covered .
-TheInnovation Spark T eamEXECUTIVE SUMMARY
SCOPE & METHODOLOGY
Objective
•This report aims tojournal thewins andtrajectory oftheGhanaian startup ecosystem .TheInnovation Spark deliberately collects vastdata points onthe
ecosystem .Weanticipate providing aone-stop platform where stakeholders (investors, founders, students, policymakers orbusiness support organizations) can
access datafordecision -making .Weenvision afuture where allinterventions oractions taken intheecosystem arebased ondata-driven facts.
Scope & methodology
•TheGhana Innovation Journal Report 2022 isbased ondatagathered bythemedia
armofTheInnovation Spark (iBlitz) over the2022 fiscal year.
•Thedatacollected, analysed andpresented inourresearch came from twosources :
•Desk -based research :data from public media, i.e.,products, features, and
funding publicly announced byecosystem stakeholders .
•Interviews :Keyactors were alsointerviewed tovalidate some information .
Wewere privileged tobeinformed ofundisclosed deals due toour
relationship withvarious entities .
•Thestartups considered inthereport areeither technology ortech-enabled, which
haveraised atleast $10,000inequity ordebt in2022.
•Thereport isnotexhaustive, anditsgoalistoprovide apicture ofthecurrent state
oftheGhanaian startup ecosystem andmaphowitevolves .Data andassurance integrity
•Considering theopaque nature oftheGhanaian market, we
strive toconstantly update ourdata tomaintain accuracy .If
you spot an error or inaccuracy, please email
reports@theinnovationspark .com.
•Anypart ofthispublication maybecopied, translated into
other languages oradapted tomeet local needs without prior
permission from theInnovation Spark, provided thework is
appropriately cited.
Economic Readiness
4.43.93.74.3-1.72.9
5.42.83.64.20.46.5
2025f2023f2022202120202019Real GDP Growth 
(2019 –2025f, in %)
Ghana Sub-Saharan Africa
Investment & Support
145Tech & 
Innovation 
Hubs
390.5391202209298
Tech CabalAfrica: The Big
DealPartechGold Rush
TrackerAverageStartup funding
2022, in $ million)Ghana Startup FundingDigital Infrastructure
30365870
KenyaNigeriaGhanaSouth AfricaInternet Penetration
(2020, in %)Digital Talent
108969467
NigeriaKenyaGhanaSouth AfricaGlobal Talent 
Competitive Ranking
(rank, out of 134 countries 
globally, 2021)
Regulation
2730303028
4655565451
20212020201820152012Regulatory Quality Score 
(2010 –2020, in %)
Ghana Sub-Saharan AfricaGhana ranks favourably in most enabling factors; more must be done to provide a conducive business environment.STARTUP ECOSYSTEM ENABLERS
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook Database (2022), Worldwide Governance Indicators (2022), World Bank Economic Indicators (2022), Global Talent Competitive Index (2021), TechPo intIntelligence (20222), Dealbase Africa Database (2022), The Big Deal Database (2022)  DATA SOURCE COMPARISON
Ghana’s startup funding by data source
(2022, value in million USD)Startups raised between $202 million –$391 million.
Comment
•Depending onthesource ofdata, startups
based inGhana raised between $202
million –$391million
•Thedisparity infigures maybeduetothe
definition ofaGhanaian startup, the
headquarters ofthecompany and the
investment threshold ofthe database .
Chipper Cash may beconsidered asa
Ghanaian startup since Ghana wasitsfirst
market, while other data sources classify
thecompany asUgandan .
•Another cause ofthedisparity isthe
investment threshold ofthedatabase .For
instance, Africa :TheBigDeal tracks deal
flow above $100,000.Whiles theGold
Rush tracks alldeals above $10,000.
Source: Gold Rush Tracker (2023), Partech Africa Report (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Tech cabal Deal Flow (2 023)
(Deals comprise only equity & debt deals)Female Founder Initiatives
Source: The Innovation Spark Database (2022)Government Initiatives
 Development Partners 
 Academia & Universities
Competitions & Events
Startup Communities, Media & Resources
The landscape of startup enablers (I).
Not an exhaustive listIncubators & Accelerators Investors
Associations & Advocacy groups
Corporates in the ecosystem
Source: The Innovation Spark Database (2022)The landscape of Ghana’s startup ecosystem (II).
Not an exhaustive list
Healthtech
Edtech & Jobtech
Media & Entertainment
Agtech & Foodtech
Climate & Cleantech
 E-commerce
Fintech
Logistics & Mobility
ECOSYSTEM INSIGHTS
•Bank ofGhana’s launch oftheregulatory andinnovative sandbox isa
realgame changer forfintech entrepreneurs, andthatitwasadmitted
intoablockchain solution issignificant .Theregulatory sandbox will
accelerate thedevelopment ofthefintech sector andcrucially create
apartnership between theBank ofGhana andthose fintech thattests
their products intheSandbox .This would make theprocess of
seeking regulatory approval forinnovative fintech products much
easier than haspreviously been thecase because oftheopportunity
forthebank tobeinvolved intheprocess much earlier than has
previously been thecase.Based ontheBank ofGhana’s commitment
totheregulatory sandbox, Iexpect toseemore innovative and
disruptive products Ghanaian entrepreneurs develop .
•Thelaunch ofthee-platform bytheGhana Revenue Authority is
another game changer .Itmakes filing taxes much simpler than has
previously been thecase.Ibelieve itwilllead toincreased and
improved collection oftaxes, crucially required forthedevelopment .
•Thecashthatcontinues toflowintoGhanaian startups .Thesignificant
funds available include grants and other forms of'soft money’
provided byorganisations such asMasterCard foundation and
international donors through various development funds .Itis
significantly easier toraise capital asaGhanaian startup orgrowth
company than before .Theopportunities intheGhanaian tech space
arethebiggest open secret inglobal techinvesting .According tothe
Africa Development Bank.,outside ofNigeria, Ghana isthetop
destination forforeign direct investment inWestern Africa (Ghana
accounts for31.5%oftotal FDIcashflows) .Ithink wehaven’t even
begun toscratch thesurface ofopportunities .Outlook
•What Iamlooking forward toseeing intheGhanaian
ecosystem in2023 firstly, Iexpect toseemore money –
and amore diversified group ofinvestors –generally
investing inGhanaian startups andgrowth companies (not
just tech companies) .Entrepreneurs with viable
propositions willattract money from abroader base of
investors –smaller andindividual investors who might
previously have invested inGovernment paper .Inseeking to
diversify their financial holdings –asalawyer advising both
investors andinvestee companies –Iamseeing alotmore
individuals andfamilies investing inlocal start-ups.Of
course, thisisrelatively insignificant inrelation tothe
money required andinvested .Still,itissignificant because it
marks achange inculture, andthequantum canonly
increase .
•Iexpect toseeeven more Ghanaian techcompanies follow
thelikes ofZeepay ,Asoriba andEmergent inexpanding
their footprint across Africa .Simultaneously, Iexpect tosee
several more Ghanaian companies successfully close
financing rounds .Iampersonally intrigued byAsoriba and
rooting forthem asthey seek toraise the$1morso
investment which Ibelieve theywillraise relatively, easilyExpectations 
Prof. Elikem Nutifafa Kuenyehia
Chairman
$212M
50+ deals (Equity & 
Debt)
Raised in 20227 M&As
75 Investors
Recorded in 2022Source of funding raised by startups 
(2022, value in %)Startups based in Ghana raised between $202 million –391 million in 2022.
Funding raised by investment type
(2022, in million USD )
Funding raised by gender of CEO
(2022, value in % )Leading sector by funding
(2022, value in % )
46%
The financial services industry 
grabbed the most funding
T op funding deals
(2022, value in million USD )
INVESTMENTS: STATE OF PLAY
Source: Gold Rush Tracker (2023)71%
Venture capital is the leading 
source of financing for startups
8%
Distribution of female -led startups 
which got fundedStartup funding has grown by 143% CAGR since 2018, with fintech being the star sector.  INVESTMENT DEEP DIVE:  YEAR IN REVIEW
Source: Gold Rush Tracker (2023)
Funding raised per year
(2022, value in million USD)
Trend
✓Although 2022 wasachallenging year, total funding raised byAfrican
startups increased between 5%–8%.Thegrowth inthetotal funding
raised byGhanaian startups for2022 wasquite impressive .Itincreased
by25%.
✓Theimpressive jump islargely driven bydeals such asmPharma’s 35
million Series Dround andDash’s seed round of$32.8million .Trend
✓Financial services continue tobeanattractive sector forinvestors on
thecontinent .46%offunding wasraised byfintech players followed by
healthcare .Funding raised by the sector 
(2022, value in million USD)
(Deals comprise only equity & debt deals)
*$ 209 m
*Only equity and debt transactionsTOP  VC FUNDING MARKETS
Africa:  The Big Deal’s top 10 African countries by startup funding
(2022, value in million USD)
Ghana is the top destination for startup investments among the second -tier countries in Africa.
Comment
•Ghana continue tofeature among theten
attractive destinations forstartup funding .
Source: Gold Rush Tracker (2023), Partech Africa Report (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Tech cabal Deal Flow (2 023)
Although gender -lens investing has been a growing trend, female founders remain largely underfunded.
Source: Gold Rush Tracker (2023), IFC: Strengthening Access to Finance for Women -led SMEs  (2020)Funding raised per CEO’s gender
(2022, value in %)
Trend
•Women founders inemerging markets faceadaunting gender finance
gapwhen growing their start-ups.They continue tofaceunequal access
tocapital (IFC) .Female -ledCEOs inGhana raised atleast 17.3million
(8%)ofthetotal capital raised in2022.Trend
•Interms ofthegender composition ofthefounding teams, gender -
diverse teams raised 9.1%ofthetotal funding whiles female -only
teams raised apaltry 0.2%offunding .Funding raised by the founding team
(2022, value in %)
Funding raised by educational background
(2022, value in %)INVESTMENT DEEP DIVE: Gender DynamicsSource: Gold Rush Tracker (2023, Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Tech cabal Deal Flow (2023)SPOTLIGHT: FEMALE TRAILBLAZERS
These women raised millions in a male -dominated startup space.
Lead
Investor45% of the capital raised was at the pre -seed, and seed stages whiles venture capital was the prevalent source of funding 
for startups.   
Source: Gold Rush Tracker (2023), Partech Africa Report (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Tech cabal Deal Flow (2 023)Funding raised by stage
(2022, value in million USD)Funding raised by source
(2022, value in %)INVESTMENT DEEP DIVE: STAGE DYNAMICS
Pre-seed 
extensionPre-Series A
Pre-Series 
B
* Venture round indicates an undisclosed funding round; however, the money came from a VC firm.
*Funding raised by business model
(2022, value in %)INVESTMENT DEEP DIVE: BUSINESS MODEL
Business -to-business companies scooped the most funding due to their positive unit economics mostly in Africa.
Which investors financed the biggest deals?  
Source: Gold Rush Tracker (2023), Partech Africa Report (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Tech cabal Deal Flow (2 023)ECOSYSTEM INSIGHTS
Outlook & Expectations Outlook & Expectations
•In2022,wesawmore funding andfocus onEntrepreneurship
Support Organisations (ESO) through thework ofImpact
Investing Ghana's National ESOCollaborative .Wealsosawthe
launch ofanew, local currency -denominated fund launched by
Injaro despite avery challenging 2022,which generated much
excitement .
•ScaleUp Africa just finished itswork with 14Business
Associations anda2-year programme with MDF , JAVentures
and Pyxera supporting 10,000 MSMEs through Mastercard
Foundations’s Covid Recovery Programme .
•AsaBusiness Development Services (BDS) andT echnical
Assistance (TA) provider, ScaleUp Africa isoptimistic about
more emerging disruptive ventures, active local Fund Managers
and women -ledbusinesses positioned forscale and job
creation .Wecontinue toadvocate forinstitutional resources
toback creative new investment vehicles incorporating TA,
infrastructure support and the longer -term strategic
partnerships ofESOs andtheir Small, Growing Business clients .
•Lastly, welook forward tothe commencement ofthe
operational setup ofaFund ofFunds .This blended -finance
vehicle seeks tounlock $75million infunding forlocal capital
providers investing inSMEs toadvance theSDGs .This
milestone comes from the extensive Entrepreneurial
Ecosystem collaboration between Venture Capital Funds,
Pension funds andother advisors .
•Myhighlight forthe year was the T ech inGhana
Conference .Itwas great toseemany people inthe
diaspora returning todosomething inGhana .Imetseveral
ofthem looking forlocals with similar interests to
collaborate with.This isgood forthegrowth ofthe
economy .
•Ontheother side, thelocal innovators need tobesmart
toforge collaborations orcapitalize onthatnetwork to
scale outside Ghana toEurope .Otherwise, thediasporans
willsweep alltheopportunities intheecosystem .
•Myhope for2023 isbright .There aremany donor
activities onthehorizon .Iforesee many ecosystem
activities since thepeople inthediaspora aremoving back
todobusiness here.
Gideon Brefo
Cofounder & CEOAma Gyammpo
Cofounder & CEO
INVESTMENT DEEP DIVE: TOP DEALS
mPharma’s $35 million Series D round represents the top deal for 2022.
Source: Gold Rush Tracker (2023), Partech Africa Report (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Tech cabal Deal Flow (2 023)INVESTMENT DEEP DIVE: TOP DEALS
Top 25 deals (II)
* Estimate
Source: Gold Rush Tracker (2023), Partech Africa Report (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Tech cabal Deal Flow (2 023)
INVESTMENT DEEP DIVE: TOP DEALS
Top 25 deals (III)
Source: Gold Rush Tracker (2023), Partech Africa Report (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Tech cabal Deal Flow (2 023)
* Estimate•Some ofthehighlights oftheecosystem environment so
farhave been theincreasing anddeepening ofefforts by
startups intheareas ofAgritech, Fintech, Insurtech,
Healthtech, Edutech andGaming .These efforts have been
relentless despite thechallenges thecountry isfraught with
andareatestament totheresilience oftheecosystem .
•Iamlooking forward toamore buoyant anddisruptive
ecosystem being more daring andtaking advantage ofour
large informal sectors .
•Ilook forward toseeing more mature startups who would
have exited successfully from other ventures andstarted
newones, creating channels ofrepeated success .•Ghanaian startups have shown resilience inadifficult economic
year.They areproving totheworld thatthecountry does lack
innovation ifonlytheycanbenurtured andsupported togrow.
•Foreach startup thatbroke theinvestment ceiling, however,
hundreds more arestruggling tosurvive, andeven now, more
than ever, there isaneed foranenabling environment to
support growth .
•In2023,Iwould liketoseeoseearethefront-runners
opening doors forthose behind them.Mentoring them and
creating asnowball effect offounders teaching other founders
•TheGhana Startup andInnovation Billistabled atParliament
with allrelevant ministries working toseehow itcanbe
implemented .
•Large companies willintegrate SMEs intotheir value chains to
infuse innovation across sectors .
•Ghanaian startups must work with startups across borders to
expand andshare learnings from other markets andmake their
voices heard inimplementing policies tostimulate growth .e.g.
AfCFTA .
•Iwould liketoseemore female founders following the
footsteps ofthe amazing ladies blazing the way in
investment ranksFreda Yawson
Senior Manager, 
Infrastructure and 
InnovationECOSYSTEM INSIGHTS
David Antwi Ofori
Director of Innovation
Outlook & Expectations Outlook & ExpectationsSource: Gold Rush Tracker (2023), Partech Africa Report (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Tech cabal Deal Flow (2 023)ALTERNATIVE FUNDING SOURCE
International Development Agencies and incubators serve as alternative sources of funding (grants) for early -stage 
companies.
Alternative funding raised by the source
(2022, value in %)
Charitable Foundation
State-sponsored interventionSource: Ghana Innovation Journal (2022), TechCrunch (2022)M&A ACTIVITIES
Exits in an ecosystem act as a metric to measure the performance of the local startup scene.  Few Ghanaian startups are 
expanding via mergers & acquisitions.
Buyer Seller
 Buyer Seller
Buyer Seller
Buyer Seller
 Buyer Seller
 Buyer Seller
•Amajor highlight fortheyearwasthe10thedition ofT ech
inGhana .The showcasing ofthe country’s gaming
community attheevent wasfascinating .
•Theconference alsoculminated with thelaunch ofT ech
Ghana Advocates, part ofGlobal T ech Advocates -a
community ofover 20,000techleaders across 30countries .
•Farmerline Group’s $14.4million Pre-Series Ainvestment
raise wasphenomenal .
•Furthermore, Imetamazing founders ofnew andexciting
Ghanaian startups, such asZuberi, Affinity, Menufinder and
OAPay.
•For2023,Ianticipate more training andopportunities for
junior andmid-levelsoftware developers .
•There willalsobeanincrease inglobal interest instart-ups
from thecontinent (funding, investment, narratives etc.)
•There willbeadeeper intersection between tech andthe
creative space andanincrease inAI-driven techcompanies .
•There willbefurther demystification around Web3and,
finally, stronger support forand anincrease infemale
founders andentrepreneurs .•Theinvestment raises likeFarmerline’s andthesubsequent
jobsitwillcreate were akeyhighlight formein2022.
•There wasatrend ofnetworking meetups, including those
targeting startups andother ecosystem actors organized
byandatcompanies likePetra, Paystack andZeepay .
These events aregood fortheecosystem .
•There was also anincreased conversation about the
ecosystem intraditional media andonmore mass media
websites
•In2023,Iexpect theemergence andvisibility ofangel
investor networks .More tech andbusiness hubs running
accelerator programs andleveraging angel investors and
other funds .
•There willbemore mergers andacquisitions bycompanies
intheecosystemAtoUlzen -Appiah 
Entrepreneurship 
Development Specialist ECOSYSTEM INSIGHTS
Akosua Annobi
Founder
Outlook & Expectations Outlook & Expectations
Source: Gold Innovation Journal (2023), Venture Capital Trust (2022), Business Ghana  (2022)ACCESS TO CAPITAL (I)
Local players will be the alternative tobridge the access to the capital gap in the current global downturn .
Comment
•With theslowdown oftheglobal venture capital market,
there isaneed for local vehicles to fund
startups . According tothe World Bank, the
annual SME financing gap inSub-Saharan Africa is
about US$330billion .Thefinancial crunch willexacerbate
theaccess tocapital challenges faced bystartups .
•In2022,ecosystem players and investors announced
interventions toprovide capital tocompanies .One key
intervention includes theWorld Bank-funded Ghana
Economic Transformation Project , which
recapitalized theVenture Capital Trust Fund (VCTF)
with$40million .
•Thecapital hasledtothecreation oftwofund-of-fund
vehicles ;theStartup Catalyst Fund ($20million )and
Strategic Industries Fund ($20million) .Sofar,the
fund has deployed GHS 60million tothree funds
Injaro Ghana Venture Capital Fund (GHS 25million ),
Mirepa Investment Advisors (GHS 20million), and
Wangara Green Ventures (GHS 15million)
•TheFund plans toleverage about GH¢5forevery GH¢1
spent, thereby increasing thecapital pool toSMEs to
about GH¢7.5billion .
Source: Gold Innovation Journal (2023), Venture Capital Trust (2022), Business Ghana  (2022), ZidiCircle (2022)ACCESS TO CAPITAL (II)
Youth -led investment vehicles such as Moonshot Venture Partners and Boxplay Ventures are bridging the financing gap.
Comment
•After being conceived in2017,theDevelopment Bank
Ghana wasfinally launched .Thebank wasseeded with
capital of$700mtoloan tofinancial institutions who in
turnwillon-lendtoSMEs
•In2022,theGhana Angels Investor Network was
resuscitated .Thenetwork isnow managed byImpact
Investing Ghana (IIGh)rather than VCTF .Thenetwork
currently serves astheapex body forangel networks in
Ghana .Thenetwor kwillsupport thecreation andgrowth
ofangel networks inGhana .
• IIGh,thenational advisory board forimpact investing, also
introduced Deal Source Africa .The digital platform
enables investors toconnect with businesses thatmeet
their criteria andneed funding .
•One ofthemost active angel investors, Sewu -Steve
T awia ,launched ahealthcare -focused venture fund based
inKenya toinvest ininnovative early-stage startups and
invention -based healthtech, medtech and biotech
enterprises thatprovides better healthcare forAfrica .
•Other investment vehicles identified include Moonshot
Venture Partners ,Zidicircle Diaspora Angel
Syndicate ,Boxplay Ventures ,Start OAandPangea
Global Ventures .
ACCESS TO CAPITAL (III)
Ernest Appiah , an angel investor seeded student founders with GHS120,000 to spark their entrepreneurial journey .
Ernest Appiah
CEO, Agricultural Manufacturing Group Ltd.
FEATHERY CARE SteFarms
Mam Ne Fo
Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2022), Gold Rush Tracker (2022), Citi newsroom (2022), AMG (2022)His company,  AMG Fertilizer, also solely sponsored the 
development of the University of Ghana Business School 
Innovation and Incubation Hub with millions of Ghana 
cedis.
ECOSYSTEM INSIGHTS
•Theecosystem hasgrown rapidly over thepastfewyears andispart
ofAfrica’s top5leading ecosystems .We’ve seen startups attracting
early andgrowth -stage capital andexpanding intoemerging markets
across Africa .
•McKinsey’s fintech report inAfrica tipsGhana asoneofthefastest
growing ecosystems withaprojected 15%growth p.a.Ghana's startup
scene ispositioned togrow, evident intheinvestment activities seen
in2022.Startups inGhana raised awhopping $146.8million in2022
with major deals likeFido’s $30m,Float's $17.5m,Africa Health
Holdings’ $10m,Zeepay’s $10m,Farmerline’s $14.9mraise.Growth
prospects look promising despite theglobal market downturn .With
theright investments, infrastructure, regulation andpolicy initiatives,
Ghana's growth aspirations willberealized .Norbert Dziwornu , 
Program Manager
•Thetechecosystem wasaninteresting scene in2023.what
stood outtomewas how bigGhana’s digital content
creation scene is.More people arecreating content and
telling thestories oftheir businesses which Ifindvery
critical tostartup development .
•There hasbeen acertain level ofbravery inthespace .
Previously entrepreneurs willnotagree toberadio to
share their solutions .Iguess when thesituation worsens,
people have nochoice buttobefrontal about their
solutions .
•Another area that stood out formeasIhosted
entrepreneurs ontheshow, participated inhubmeetups,
andworked with MEST isthegrowing acceptance of
technology entrepreneurship .There isbeginning tobean
appreciation ofthespace, anditgives people hope inbeing
partoftheecosystem andreduces thebarrier toentry .
•For2023,Ibelieve thecurrent economic situation willbe
challenging .Entrepreneurs with solid solutions willsurvive .
There isabitofmarket saturation, andentrepreneurs will
bebreaking newground withnewproducts andmarkets .Philip Ashon
Host
Citi Trends, Citifm
•In2022,we’ve seen rapid improvements inregulations andpolicies thatarevitalcatalysts to
accelerate thegrowth ofthestartup ecosystem, likethelaunching andpiloting oftheInnovation
andRegulatory Sandbox bytheCentral Bank ofGhana andtheSecurities andExchanges
Commission incollaboration with EMTECH LLC asweastheongoing Ghana Startup Billto
guide activities ofstartups andearly-stage businesses .These arevitalandsignal progression .
•Ghana isalsogrowing asafintech hubandoneofAfrica’s largest fintech markets andishome to
agrowing web 3ecosystem .Even though itisatitsvery early stages, theprospects avery
promising asthiscanbeleveraged toincrease access tofinancial services fortheunderserved
andcreate solutions that willbring more transparency inprocesses andenable amore
decentralized ecosystem where people have control over how they usetheinternet inanew
way.
•Ibelieve strongly andvery optimistic about Ghana’s growth perspectives asitisstrategically
positioned tocompete against emerging techecosystems across Africa .
Outlook & Expectations Outlook & ExpectationsSource: Ghana Innovation Journal (2022), Gold Rush Tracker (2022)TRACTION: MARKET EXPANSION
Startups scaled to at least eleven countries to expand their addressable market.
Ethiopia
Nigeria
Botswana
Egypt
Liberia
Senegal
Barbados
Zambia
Uganda
South Africa
KenyaSource: Gold Innovation Journal (2023), Complete Farmer (2022), Muse Africa (2022), Tome -Chris & Sam Baado’s LinkedIn (2022), Bu siness 
Insider (2022)TRACTION
Startups announced impressive milestones.
Comment
•Inanattempt tobuild inpublic, startups share stories
about how their products andservices arefaring inthe
market .During the year under review, companies
announced impressive milestones .
•Inthefintech space, Zeepay’s total processed volume
stood at$1.8bnfor2022.Fido,thedigital lending
platform, crossed 400,000 unique customers and1m+
downloads ontheGoogle Play Store .InitsSeries A
funding announcement, the CEO, Alon Eitan ,told
T echcrunch thatthey hadunderwritten 1.5million loans
valued at$150m.Theall-in-onefinance platform forSMEs,
Built Accounting, hasalsoprocessed over $700msince
itsinception .Over thepast twoyears, Muzzuma has
processed $140m+ transactions forauser base of
365,000customers and10,000stores .
•Thee-commerce order fulfilment platform, VDL ,reached
asignificant milestone ofGHS 1,000,000 worth of
transactions .Wi-flix,the video -on-demand provider,
passed themilestone ofone million paying customers
after signing up300,000newsubscribers inoneyear.
•T wo founders who participated inthe Nasdaq
Entrepreneurial Center’s Milestone Maker program ,T om -
Chris Emewulu (CEO, SFAN) and Samuel Badoo
(CEO Fleri),were spotlighted ontheNew Y ork Times
Square Nasdaq MarketSite .
Tom -Chris & Samuel on Nasdaq’s MarketSite
Complete Farmer’s 
Desmond Koney
was adjudged Greater 
Accra’s Regional Best 
Crop Farmer in 2022.*2022 Total processed volume $1.8 billion
 $4 billion
* Total processed volumes reported as 
of October 2022 
*Total processed transactions reported as of 
November 2022$700 million
$150 million
* Loans underwritten reported as of 
June 2022
$140 million
*Total processed volumes reported 
as of August 2022Fintech is the darling of investors due to the kind of high growth trajectory its offers venture funds.TRACTION
Source: Asempa FM (2023): Interview with Zeepay’s CEO, Dream Oval (2022): From Thesis to Trusted: Ghana’s Most Ambitious Fintech, 
Techcrunch (2022): Fido’s Series A announcement, Built Accounting (2022): Anniversary note, Business Insider (2022): Web 3 entrepreneurs
Outlook
•Ghana hasemerged asoneofthecontinent's most robust andmature
startup ecosystems .Ghana's development results from several positive
factors, including substantial consumer andcommercial markets, highly
developed entrepreneurial skills, andarobust corporate sector .Ghana has
connections toincreasing foreign investors andaccess todomestic finance .
•TheFourth Industrial Revolution hasarrived inGhana, where technological
innovation dominates, and digital firms are growing and quantity
(particularly since theonset oftheCOVID -19pandemic)
•Thetelecommunication industry hasplayed amajor rolewithin thestartup
ecosystem todrive business transactions, improve communication, and
provide asecured and cost-effective option toconduct financial
transactions withmobile phones
•Theecosystem hasacollective voice tolobby forpolicies thatpromote
theinterests ofentrepreneurship inGhana thanks tosynergy through
varied networks .
Outlook &Expectations
•Thesignificant increase inVCfunding to
Ghana and theexpansion ofother
companies toGhana keeps increasing .
•Logistics startups raised more funding
than Iexpected, andIanticipate the
trend togrow in2023,seeing that it
compliments the AfCFTA
implementation .Ialso anticipate the
riseinthegigeconomy, viz-to-say,gig
marketplaces andfinancial solutions for
thegigeconomy .Foster Awintiti Akugri
Head of InnovationECOSYSTEM INSIGHTS
Prof. Mathew Tsamenyi
Executive Director  
Expectations
•Since most SMEs inGhana areinformal andstilldon't leverage technology ordigital solutions, the
startup ecosystem inGhana stillhasmuch -untapped potential forinnovation anddevelopment .
•Ghana hasbeen working onastartup billthatwillsupport startups legally andfoster creativity,
innovation, andnewtechnologies toachieve strong added value andcompetitiveness atthenational,
regional, anddistrict levels .Thebillhasbeen indifferent stages ofworkshop development since 2020
inorder tomake final adjustments .Later thisyear, weanticipate that lawtogothrough final
revisions andapprovals before being approved byparliament .
Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2022), Ghana Startup Bill (2022), MESTI (2022), Bank of Ghana (2022): Regulatory SandboxPOLICY STATE OF PLAY (I)
The passage of startup -friendly policies will spur innovation in the country. 
Sponsoring 
institutionsPOLICY STATE OF PLAY (II)
Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2022), Ghana Startup Bill (2022), MESTI (2022), Bank of Ghana (2022): Regulatory SandboxThe passage of startup -friendly policies will spur innovation in the country. 
Sponsoring 
institutionsPOLICY: COMMERCIALIZING RESEARCH (III)
Source: GRISPCO (2023)The Ghana Research and Innovation Support Programmes Coordinating Office has been created 
to lead the commercialization of research agenda.
ECOSYSTEM INSIGHTS
•Continued growth ofstartups :Ghana's startup ecosystem hasbeen
growing steadily inrecent years, andIexpect thistrend tocontinue in2023.
More entrepreneurs willlaunch new tech startups, andexisting ones will
scale upandexpand their operations toother African countries .
•Increased funding opportunities :Iforesee increased funding
opportunities .Venture capitalists andangel investors willcontinue toinvest
inpromising startups .Atthesame time, thegovernment andprivate sector
willoffer more support forearly-stage ventures through incubation and
acceleration programs .
•Favourable policies :Ghana's government hasshown akeen interest in
supporting thetechindustry’s growth, which willlikely continue in2023.The
government willcontinue toenact policies toencourage innovation, create a
favourable business environment forstartups, andsupport local techtalent .
•Improved regulations :With thegrowth ofthetech industry comes theneed forregulations thatprotect
consumers, investors, andbusinesses .In2023,Ghana's regulators willlikely work todevelop andimplement
new policies that ensure theindustry operates fairly andtransparently, especially infinancial services,
healthcare andrelated .
•Markets andinnovations :Toscale their operations andcontinue tobeagoing concern, tech startups in
Ghana willembrace M&A in2023 andbeyond .Weshould expect toseealotofM&A activities inthespace .
Wewillalsoseegrowth inproducts andservices inthefollowing areas :fintech, health tech, andagritech .
•Collaboration and partnerships :Theindustry willseemore collaboration andpartnerships between
startups, corporates, andgovernment agencies .This willinclude initiatives topromote knowledge -sharing,
capacity -building, andco-creation .Isidore Kpotufe
Chief Marketing OfficerOutlook & Expectations
•Iamsoexcited about thegrowth andopportunities
inthehubecosystem .2022 wasarecovery period
formost start-upsandorganizations .Itwasalsoa
period inwhich most companies tested new
initiatives because ofthecomplexities introduced by
COVID -19.The year was also characterized by
higher inflation, affecting most companies .
•In2023,Ihope toseeamore stable economy
regarding inflation, forex etc.There willbesome level
ofincrease inskilled labour inthecountry .There is
anabundance offree programs geared towards
building youth skills.
•Ialsoseeapositive shiftinconsumer behaviour to
accept anduse/try technology products (more open
toaccepting technology)
Outlook & Expectations
Florence T offa
CEO
Source: Gold Rush Tracker (2023), Partech Africa Report (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Tech cabal Deal Flow (2 023)TALENT ON THE MOVE
Ecosystem players have been recruited by the state and other institutions to leverage their vast experience.
Comment
Startup ecosystem players have been recruited andappointed to
severe invarious capacities bythestate andother institutions for
their skills andexperience .In2022,TheCEO ofIntelligent Capital,
Leticia Browne ,was appointed tothe CSIR -Science and
T echnology Policy Research Institute board .Shehasserved as
theT echnical Advisor forInnovation andPrivate Sector Engagement
totheSDGs Advisory Unit intheOffice ofthePresident since
2018.
Theformer CEO oftheGlobal Startup Ecosystem, Einstein Ntim ,
hasbeen appointe dtheDiaspora Engagement Officer attheOffice
ofthe President .Heleads strategic programming efforts for
engagements, forums and initiatives that accelerate diaspora
engagement andactivities fortheDiaspora Affairs Office .
Josiah Eyison hasbeen re-elected astheGhana Hubs Network
(GHN) Chairperson .TheGhana Hubs Network istheumbrella body
oftech andinnovation hubs, setuptosupport andpromote the
collaboration ofhubs tobuild astrong entrepreneurial ecosystem .
TheFormer Kuda Bank Ghana andJumo Ghana CEO, Dr.Arnold
Kavaarpuo ,joined thePan-African venture studio NativeCap
Ventures asaPartner toinvest inthenext generation offounders .
NativeCap isamission -driven holding company thatbuilds, grows, and
owns companies forthelongterm.
Diaspora move
Founders of Ghanaian descent are making waves in globally.
Comment
•Thethree partners ofGhanaian -descent (Rodney Appiah,
Edwin Appiah &Wilfred Fianko )raised a£20million
fund toinvest infounders from diverse backgrounds .
Cornerstone VCinvests £250k-£1minpre-seed and
seed-stage tech startups and plans toback upto40
companies and allocate 40%ofitsmoney tofollow -on
investments .
•ODBA &Co.Ventures ,theLondon andNigerian -based
venture capital firm,appointed Benjamin Boateng ,aformer
senior director ofExworks Capital andManaging Partner of
Monument Corporate Finance, asaVenture Partner .Benjamin
isaglobal financial market, trade finance, andprivate capital
investment professional .Heisanon-executive director on
theboard ofAfrica Mobile Networks, asub-Saharan African,
private equity -backed, solar-powered infrastructure towers
business .
•GenioPay ,aworldwide transfer network, hasexpanded its
services tomillions ofconsumers after receiving aCanada
MSB License (Money Services Business) .Founded byJames
Reinhold in2020,GenioPay isredefining international
money transfer byhelping global clients tosave huge on
transfer feesandexchange rates
Source: Gold Innovation Jouran (2023)ECOSYSTEM INSIGHTS
•Ghana hashad itsfairshare ofpandemic -induced
economic hiccups inthepastfewmonths .
•But looking attrends inthe entrepreneurship
ecosystem, there's every reason tobehopeful .For
example, different sources noted thatstartups inGhana
raised atleast $391minreported funding in2022.In
2019,before thepandemic, thatwas$45M,according
toWeetracker ,or$26M,according toDisrupt Africa .
•Ithink thatGhana willkeep being among thetopVC
markets inAfrica, andI'vesaidthisistheyearforAfrica
totheworld interms ofinnovation andgrowth .
T om -Chris Emewulu
CEO & Venture Builder
•One ofmynotable highlights istheflexibility ofentrepreneurs .Inaworld
where businesses must adapt quickly, Ghanaian entrepreneurs have proven
adaptable andcannavigate difficult times .Thisisparticularly notable given the
challenges entrepreneurs inGhana face.
•Another highlight wastheincrease innetworking events .Networking events
provide agreat platform forentrepreneurs toconnect with other
entrepreneurs, potential investors, andcustomers .Theriseinthese events
creates more fluidity intheecosystem, enabling entrepreneurs tocollaborate,
share ideas andaccess newopportunities .
•There wasmore engagement bykeystakeholders onhow toenhance the
infrastructure supporting entrepreneurship .Additionally, there hasbeen afocus
onpromoting female entrepreneurship andimproving access tofinancing .
•In2023,wewillbeexcited toseetheimproved business registration
processes .Improvement intheprocess makes iteasier fornewbusinesses to
getofftheground .Inaddition, weanticipate anincrease intheincorporation
options .This means theopportunity toregister asacommunity interest
company, which canhelpsupport community development andsocial initiatives .
•Another areaisaccess toskills development training .Asentrepreneurs lookto
grow andbecompetitive, there isaneed tohelpthem develop newskills and
stayup-to-date onindustry trends .Moreover, funding forskills acquisition is
critical forentrepreneurs withlimited resources .
•Finally, weanticipate increased training oninvestment anditsrisks toenable
entrepreneurs tobeinvestment -ready .Byproviding training around
investment, wecanhelpmore entrepreneurs access thefunding they need to
succeed .T onisha Tagoe
FounderOutlook & Expectations Outlook & Expectations
EMERGING SECTORS
Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2022), Ameyaw Debrah (2022): Yetra E-Blue Esports Stadium, Esports Association (2022), Business Ghana 
(2022): Africa Bitcoin Conference.The ecosystem played host to conferences on frontier technologies. Ghana’s first esports stadium was 
launched.
GLOOMY MOMENTS
The inability of startups to raise funding coupled with the current focus on profits rather than growth led to some 
companies downsizing. 
Source: Technova Ghana (2022): Linkfire shurdown , BBC (2022): Twitter office shutdown, Techcabal (2022): Viamo layoff, Techcrunch (2022): 
Chipper Cash lay offPredictions/Trends to watch
These trends point to a bustling future for the startup ecosystem in Ghana.
Source: Innovation Spark analysis and dresearch (2023)www.theinnovationspark.com  | reports@theinnovationspark.com | Social Handle: @theinnovationspark   | Social media pages:    
COMPANY PROFILE
CORE EXPERTISE
For partnerships and inquiries, email: elorm@theinnovationspark.com

Extracted from: Ghana-Innovation-Journal-Half-Year-Report-2023.pdf
Ghana Innovation 
Ecosystem Report 
H1 2023
GIJ– Ghana Innovation Journal
Bridging the data asymmetry gap between Startups, Investors, 
Development Partners and Corporates.  
1
@ghinnojournal
Image Credit: https://pexels.com/@kh -ali-li/2
CONTENT
Executive Summary 3
Key Insights 4
Investment Trend 5 - 12
Interview: President, Association of Ghana 
Startups13 - 16
Startup Expansion Map 17
Startup Spotlight: Appruve 18
Access to Finance 19 - 20
New Product Launch 21
Interview: CEO, Ghana Venture Capital and 
Private Equity Association22 - 25
Gloomy Moments 26
Ecosystem Highlights 27 - 30
Methodology 31
About the Innovation Spark 32 - 33EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY 2022  saw  an exhilarating  investment  boom ; cheap  money  and  outlandish  valuations  drove  investments  in Ghana  startups  to a 
new  high . With  the increase  in the US Fed’s  interest  rate  and  inflation,  there  has been  a decline  in cheap  money  globally .  Ghana’s  
startup  funding  is already  feeling  the impact . 2023  funding  is likely  to hit its lowest  since  2019 . 
Despite  the bleakness  of investments  flowing  in, there  are still  several  reasons  to celebrate  this  half -year . Female -led teams  raised  
more  investment  for the first  time  when  the total  investment  value  was  considered . However,  when  it comes  to the deal  count,  
male -led startups  outnumber  the number  of female -led startups  that  received  funding . Exit  opportunities  are always  at the top of 
the agenda  for investors . The  KYC  company  Appruve , exited  to the Pan -African  startup  Smile  ID. This  trend  proves  that  companies  
in Ghana  are growing  and  can  create  value  for larger  ventures .
We had  exclusive  interviews  from  pillars  in the ecosystem  from  the Association  of Ghana  Startups  and  Ghana  Venture  Capital  
and  Private  Equity  Association  CEOs  to discuss  key developments,  such  as the status  of the Startup  Bill and  the state  of funding  
for ventures  in Ghana . Regarding  funding,  our data  shows  that  TechStars  and  Kosmos  Innovation  Centre  are leading  international  
and  local  investors  in Ghana -based  ventures . To bridge  the funding  gap,  we observed  Mastercard  Foundation’s  collaboration  with  
various  banks  to deploy  innovative  financing  to startups .  
Another  important  topic  we love  to assess  is the scaling  trajectory  of startups .  For the half -year,  both  Farmerline  and  Zeepay  
launched  in Ivory  Coast  while  IT Consortium  found  a new  home  in Rwanda . Several  innovative  products  were  also  launched  by 
startups  and  entrepreneurship  support  organizations .   For instance,  Ashesi  University’s  faculty  won  a $100,000 grant  to build  the 
African  Women  Amplified  digital  platform  to provide  resources  to female  founders  in West  Africa . 
Although  the Ghanaian  startup  scene  is nascent,  with  concerted  efforts  being  undertaken  by the stakeholders,  there  are brighter  
days  ahead . 
Isaac  Newton  Acquah
Co-Founder
The  Innovation  Spark
3
4Biggest industry
Logistics & 
Transportation
Claimed 78% in funding (H1 2023)
Total funding raised
$25 million
an 86% year -on-year decline
Biggest deal
$13 million
Jetstream’s  Pre -Series A round 
Median ticket size
$113,000
Median funding size raised
M&A deals
1
Appruve’s  acquisition constitutes the 
sole M&A deal   
Gender dynamics 
78%
Funding raised by gender -diverse 
teams 
4
Ghana Innovation Ecosystem Report – Key Insights Funding raised (in $ million) and deal count (in %).
Agriculture 
& Food
32%
Logistics & 
Transportation
53%Healthcare
10%Others
5%Funding raised by sector in H1 2023 (in %).
Source: Gold Rush Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) Ghana -based  startups  
raised  $25 million  in 
equity  and  debt  deals . 
Funding  has slumped  by 
86% in the first  half  of 
2023 . In 2022 , several  large  
deals  were  witnessed  at 
the beginning  of the 
financial  year . Deals  like 
mPharma’s  $35 million  
Series  D round  and  Dash’s  
$32 million  seed  round  
were  closed  in the year’s  
first  half .  Such  deals  
resulted  in the $187  
million  raised  in H1 2022 .
 
Industry -wise,  the 
transport  and  logistics  
sector  leads  the pack  due  
to Jetstream’s  $13 million  
Pre-series  A round . The  
Agriculture  and  Food  
sector  is led by Degas ’ $8 
million  Series  A raise . With $25 million raised, startup funding in 2023 will likely 
hit its lowest since 2019 . Funding has declined by 86% for 
the first half of 2023. 
H1
655111167209
25
051015202530
050100150200250
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 H1 2023Funding Deal count
5STARTUPS 
FUNDING 
OVERVIEW
Funding raised by industry ($ million).Compared  to H1 2022 , the 
deal  volume  for the  
Logistics  and  
Transportation  sector  has 
grown  by 32%. The  sector  
attracted  $10 million  in 
funding  in H1 2022  
compared  to $13.2 million  
in H1 2023 .   
Surprisingly,  the 
ecosystem's  crown  jewel  in 
2022 , “fintech”,  has 
slumped  by 99%. We 
expect  to see an 
appreciable  level  of 
funding  for fintech  with  
some  fintech  deals  we 
know  of in the due  
diligence  phase .  The  total  
fintech  funding  for 2023  is 
not likely  to reach  2022 ’s 
deal  volume  of $96 
million .  
The  health -tech  sector  has 
also  declined  by 17.5%. Logistics and Transportation steal the spotlight in H1 2023.
Top deals
Source: Gold Rush Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) 6STARTUP 
FUNDING BY 
INDUSTRY
Source: Gold Rush Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) With  logistics  and  
transportation  being  the 
most  funded  sector  for H1 
2023 , the Supply -Chain  
Tech  map  highlights  
startups  and  growing  
champions  in supply  chain  
management,  i.e., 
purchasing,  logistics,  
transport  and  distribution .
Finance/Insurance
Sustainability
Drone Technology
City Logistics, Last Mile 
& Transportation
Auto Infrastructure
Digital freight
Mapping & 
Navigation
Food supply 
chain
Marketplace
7GHANA’S 
SUPPLY -CHAIN 
TECH 
ECOSYSTEM
1
2
3
4
52021 2022 H1 2023
Healthcare
Energy & Water
Fintech
Logistics & 
Transport
Agriculture & 
FoodTop 5
Fintech
Healthcare
Agriculture & 
Food
Logistics & 
Transport
Energy & WaterLogistics & 
Transport
Healthcare
Fintech
Energy & Water
Education & 
JobsThe most preferred sectors include healthcare, fintech, 
logistics and transport.
Source: Gold Rush Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) Since  2021 , the healthcare  
and  fintech  sectors  have  
grabbed  the most  funding . 
mPharma’s  several  rounds  
of funding  constitute  the 
chuck  of the healthcare  
industry's  funding .  
In the Energy  and  water  
sector,  PEG’s  several  
rounds  constituted  the 
chunk  of funding  until  the 
exit  to Bboxx  last  year .
8STARTUPS 
FUNDING BY 
INDUSTRY
Female -led startups and gender -diverse  teams raised the 
most funding.
Female
52%Male
48%
Foreign -trained
94%Locally -trained
6%
Gender 
diverse
53%Male only
47%Funding raised by CEO’s gender (%). Composition of founding team (%). Education background of CEOs (%).
Source: Gold Rush Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) Female -led CEOs  raised  
52% of the total  capital  
raised . However,  this  
results  from  Jetstream’s  
$13 million  round .  In 
terms  of deal  count,  male -
led CEOs  constitute  90%.
Regarding  the composition  
of the founding  teams,  it is 
pleasing  to see that  gender -
diverse  teams  lead  the pack  
by 53%. Empirical  evidence  
shows  that  diverse  teams  
generate  a 30% higher  
multiple  on invested  
capital .
It is not surprising  that  the 
foreign -educated  founders  
raise  the most  capital . Most  
of these  founders  studied  
in the global  North,  where  
the VC industry  thrives .
9FOUNDER 
DYNAMICS
All Nations 
UniversityMost local founders who raised funding graduated from 
the University of Ghana  and KNUST .
Business
45%
Applied 
sciences
22%Basic sciences
22%Social sciences
11%University attended by locally -trained founders (%).Academic majors of locally -trained CEOs (%). 44% of the local  founders  
who  raised  investments  
studied  at the University  
of Ghana  and  Kwame  
Nkrumah  University  of 
Science  and  Technology .
Most  local  founders  who  
raised  funding  in H1 2023  
have  business  degrees . The  
founders  graduated  in 
subjects  such  as Business  
Administration,  
Accounting,  Banking  & 
Finance  and  Public  
Administration . Founders  
with  science  backgrounds  
graduated  in 
Biotechnology,  Physics  & 
Mathematics  and  
Mechanical  Engineering . 
Source: Gold Rush Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) 10LOCAL 
FOUNDERS 
DYNAMICS
All the deals  in the first half of 2023 are early -stage 
deals  (preseed to pre -Series A).
Incubator & 
Accelerator
2%Venture 
Capital …
B2C & B2B
1%
B2C
9%B2B
90%Funding raised source (%).
Funding raised by business model (%).
Source: Gold Rush Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) In H1 2023 , no late -stage  
deals  were  witnessed . 
Most  of the deals  were  
below  Series  A rounds .
Venture  capital  continues  
to be the source  of capital  
for the founders  who  raised  
capital .  
There  is a preference  for 
startups  operating  a B2B 
model . B2B startups  raised  
90% of the funding .  This  
represents  a 26% increase  
since  H1 2022 .Funding raised by stage ($ million).
11FUNDING BY 
STAGE
Investors who participated in more than 1 deal. (# of 
deals)Techstars  and Kosmos Innovation Center  are the leading 
international and local investors  respectively in startups 
for the first half of the year.
Source: Gold Rush Database (2023), Africa: The Big Deal Database (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) Techstars  was  the lead  
investor  for the first  half  
of the year . The  
accelerator  backed  the 
web 3 upskilling  
platform,  Ayagigs , the 
neo  bank,  BezoMoney  
and  Brolly , the insure -
tech  startups . 
On the local  front,  
Kosmos  Innovation  
Center  invested  in Kodu  
Technology , Agro  
Empire , Aquamet  and  
Sagrisalma .Local investors who participated in a deal. (# of deals)
Investee: 
Ayagigs , BezoMoney, Brolly
Investee: 
BezoMoney , Talamus Health
Investee:
 Affinity Africa, Gigmile
Investee: 
BD Waste, Chestify AI
Investee: 
Kodu Technology, Agro Empire, 
Aquamet, Sagrisalma
Investee: 
Kofa  Technologies
Investee: 
Wewire Africa
12NOTABLE 
INVESTORS
13INTERVIEW WITH SOLOMON ADJEI, 
PRESIDENT OF THE ASSOCIATION OF 
GHANA STARTUPS
Please  tell us about  your  background .
Solomon  Adjei  is an accomplished  IT professional  with  extensive  
experience  in IT systems,  business  management,  and  project  leadership . 
He is dedicated  to addressing  youth  unemployment  challenges  in Africa . 
With  special  interests  in international  trade,  technology,  innovations,  
youth  development,  startups,  and  business  and  entrepreneurship,  he 
seeks  to foster  growth  and  innovation  in these  domains . As the Founding  
President  of the Association  of Ghana  Startups  (AGS),  he has  created  a 
vibrant  platform  for young  entrepreneurs  to network,  learn,  and  access  
funding . As CEO  of Groupe  SL, he oversees  various  ventures,  including  
event  organizing  and  fintech  solutions . Previously,  he served  as the 
Managing  Editor  of iNews  Ghana,  delivering  quality  content  across  
various  sectors . Solomon  Adjei's  career  is marked  by his commitment  to 
excellence,  entrepreneurship,  and  societal  betterment .
We are a flourishing  ecosystem,  making  significant  strides  and  poised  
for more  opportunities  in the future  despite  encountering  our own  set 
of challenges . Government  support,  channelled  through  initiatives  like 
NEIP,  GEA,  Accra  Digital  Centre,  and  ministries  such  as 
Communications,  Environment,  Science  Technology,  and  Innovation,  is 
bolstering  startups . Private  institutions  like  MEST  and  Ghana  Hubs,  
along  with  incubators,  accelerators,  and  notably,  The  Association  of 
Ghana  Startups,  of which  I am the leader,  play  pivotal  roles  in uniting  
all ecosystem  stakeholders . Our  ecosystem  is indeed  thriving,  
performing  well  comparatively . However,  challenges  persist,  including  
a lack  of robust  incubation  systems,  funding  structures,  co-working  
spaces,  and  direct  access  to funds  for scalability . While  we address  
these  issues,  our overall  progress  remains  positive,  and  there  is ample  
room  for improvement .How  would  you describe  Ghana’s  startup  
scene?
Source: Innovation Spark with AGS (2023) This article was transcribed and edited with the help of AI.
1414 Source: Innovation Spark with AGS (2023) 
This article was transcribed and edited with the help of AI.
Why  does  the Association  of Ghana  
Startups  exist,  and why  must  every  
startup  be a member?
The  AGS  exists  as the primary  coordinating  body  within  the Ghanaian  
startup  ecosystem . Its main  purpose  is to create  a unified  platform  
that  brings  together  startups  from  various  sectors  across  all regions  of 
Ghana . The  AGS  emphasizes  startups  that  are innovative  and  have  the 
potential  to scale  beyond  local  borders . Being  a member  of the AGS  is 
crucial  because  it provides  startups  with  a centralized  platform  to 
connect  with  a wide  array  of resources  and  support  networks . 
By uniting  under  the AGS  umbrella,  startups  gain  visibility,  recognition,  
and  the potential  to access  tailored  assistance  that  aligns  with  their  
needs . The  AGS  is pivotal,  effectively  linking  startups  with  relevant  
stakeholders,  funding  opportunities,  training  programs,  and  market  
access  initiatives . AGS  is pivotal  in fostering  a thriving  ecosystem  
where  startups  can  flourish  and  maximize  their  growth  potential .
What  are the activities  the association  is 
working  on to make  Ghana  the number  1 
African  startup  hub?
One  fundamental  focus  is on creating  a robust  and  accessible  database  that  
ensures  convenient  access  for all stakeholders  interested  in the startup  
space . This  database  comprises  both  startups,  forming  a central  pool,  and  
crucial  service  providers  such  as hubs,  training  institutions,  funding  
agencies,  and  government  bodies . By centralizing  information,  AGS  aims  to 
streamline  connections  and  facilitate  collaboration  among  diverse  players .
Additionally,  AGS  has  launched  the Ghana  Startup  Ecosystem  Assembly,  a 
program  that  brings  together  all ecosystem  participants  through  
roundtable  discussions . This  assembly  serves  as a platform  for dialogue  and  
problem -solving,  with  the overarching  theme  of "Collaborate,  Innovate,  and  
Invest  for Greater  Impact ." AGS  is actively  fostering  a culture  of cooperation  
to drive  innovation  and  investment  across  the ecosystem,  thereby  achieving  
more  substantial  and  far-reaching  outcomes .
Furthermore,  AGS  organizes  the annual  Ghana  Startup  Week,  a week -long  
program  offering  various  summits,  forums,  discussions,  and  expos . 1515 Source: Innovation Spark with AGS (2023) 
This article was transcribed and edited with the help of AI.
This  event  allows  startups  to showcase  their  products,  engage  in 
focused  discussions,  and  pitch  for funding . The  association  also  plans  
to establish  student  startup  clubs,  nurture  entrepreneurial  skills  
among  students  and  guide  them  toward  becoming  job creators .
AGS  is committed  to supporting  startups  to access  funding  through  
initiatives  like  the Ghana  Startup  Investor  Connect . The  association  
collaborates  with  entities  like  the AfCTA  Secretariat,  Ghana  Investment  
Promotion  Centre  and  Ghana  Export  Promotion  Authority  to enable  
startups  to access  international  markets .
To achieve  these  objectives,  AGS  operates  under  four  key thematic  
areas : capacity  building,  assets  to finance,  access  to markets,  and  
policy  advocacy . By focusing  on these  areas  and  driving  collaboration,  
innovation,  and  investment,  AGS  aims  to propel  Ghana's  startup  
ecosystem  to the forefront  of African  innovation  and  entrepreneurship .
How  will the Ghana  Startup  Bill contribute  
to that  trajectory?
The  Ghana  Startup  Bill is poised  to play  a pivotal  role  in advancing  Ghana's  
startup  ecosystem . Under  the policy  advocacy  pillar,  the Association  of 
Ghana  Startups  is actively  working  on developing  and  promoting  the Ghana  
Startup  Innovation  Bill. 
The  bill's  primary  objective  is establishing  a well -defined  and  attractive  
incentive  structure  within  the startup  ecosystem . By outlining  clear  
regulations  and  guidelines,  the bill aims  to enhance  the overall  regulatory  
framework  of the startup  space . This,  in turn,  will make  the environment  
more  appealing  and  conducive  for both  existing  startups  and  potential  
supporters  who  wish  to engage  in the ecosystem .
The  process  of drafting  the bill has  been  a collaborative  effort  involving  
various  stakeholders,  including  the Hub  Network,  the Network  of Young  
Entrepreneurs,  the National  Entrepreneurship  and  Innovation  Plan,  and  the 
Ghana  Digital  Centers  Ltd. Through  extensive  stakeholder  engagement  
conducted  across  the country  since  2019 , the bill has  reached  an advanced  
drafting  stage . 1616 Source: Innovation Spark with AGS (2023) 
This article was transcribed and edited with the help of AI.
What is the status of the bill?
The  technical  committee  is working  with  the Ministry  of 
Communication  and  Digitalization  to submit  the bill to Parliament  by 
the end  of the year . There  is a strong  hope  and  intention  that  the bill 
will  be passed  into  law  before  the upcoming  election  season  of the 
following  year . The  Association  is diligently  working  to ensure  the bill's  
progress  through  the legislative  process  to establish  a comprehensive  
regulatory  framework  that  supports  and  promotes  the growth  of the 
startup  ecosystem .Solomon Adjei
President, The Association of Ghana 
StartupsThree companies scaled to other African countries to expand 
their addressable markets .
Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2023), Innovation Spark Analytics (2023) With  the challenging  
economic  terrain,  it is 
unsurprising  that  just  a 
handful  of companies  are 
expanding  their  market  
reach . Most  companies  are 
focused  on cutting  costs  to 
extend  their  runway . 
Zeepay  setup  in the 
Gambia,  Cote  D'Ivoire  and  
Zambia . While  IT 
Consortium  expanded  to 
Rwanda .
Farmerline , the “Amazon  
for African  farmers,  also  
expanded  to the Ivory  
Coast  to deepen  its West  
Africa  reach .
Rwanda
Cote D’Ivoire
Gambia
Zambia
17TECH 
EXPANSION 
MAP
Appruve was acquired  by the Pan -Africa ID verification 
company Smile Identity.
Year  established :
2018
Presence  (pre -acquisition)  
Ghana,  Egypt,  Kenya,  Nigeria,  
Uganda,  South  Africa
Acquisition  price
$15 – 20 million
Buyer Seller
After graduating with a bachelor's degree in Banking and Finance from 
Radford University College, Paul Kwesi Damalie joined MEST Africa's 
Entrepreneurs -in-Training programme.  His first venture out of MEST 
was Loystar , a customer loyalty platform that enabled small businesses 
to retain their customers.
He subsequently co -founded Inclusive Innovations Inc. after deciding to 
solve the challenges faced by financial services with the customer 
identification and verification process.
Appruve , a product of Inclusive Innovations, makes it easy for financial 
services to verify individuals and businesses all over Africa. It enables 
financial institutions to meet anti -money laundering, KYC and counter -
terrorist financing compliance, ensure the most stringent privacy and 
security standards are met, and reduce the cost of customer acquisition. 
18MERGERS & 
ACQUISITION
Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2023), Techcrunch  (2023) 
Local initiatives like Impact Investing’s Fund of Funds  will 
hopefully unlock local capital for startups . 
Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2023), NEIP (2023), CCF (2023): Fund of Funds Vehicles for Small and Growing Businesses ReportIn a push  to unlock  capital,  
the private  sector -led 
initiative  Impact  Investing  
Ghana  has begun  
operationalizing  a Fund  of 
Funds  vehicle .  The  fund  
seeks  to unlock  $75 
million  in local  and  
international  funding  for 
local  capital  providers  
investing  in Small  and  
Medium  Enterprises .
In a historic  move,  the 
NEIP,  through  the World  
Bank -sponsored  Ghana  
Economic  Transformation  
Project,  is deploying  $7 
million  to support  
innovation  hubs  to 
accelerate  startups  in 
Ghana . Ci Gaba Fund of 
Funds
Fund size
Purpose To address the lack of 
investment in early -stage funds 
providing equity investment in 
SGBs$ 75 million
Target Invest in 10 to 15 fund managers
Geography Ghana and West AfricaHubs Acceleration 
Grant Programme
Fund size
Purpose To support innovation hubs to 
accelerate startups and SME 
growth.$ 7 million
Current 
beneficiaries
19ACCESS TO 
FINANCE
ABSA Bank & Mastercard Foundation  are deploying 
innovative financing models  by lending to startups at 10% 
p.a.
Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2023), NEIP (2023), CCF (2023): Fund of Funds Vehicles for Small and Growing Businesses ReportThe  ABSA  and  Mastercard  
Foundation  provide  
unsecured  loans  and  
grants  to fintech  and  
agritech  companies .  The  
partnership  seeks  to 
deploy  innovative  
financing  models  to fill the 
funding  gap .
The  first  beneficiaries  of 
the grant  component  of the 
programme  provided  GHS  
1.95 million  to ten fintech  
and  agritech  companies . ABSA Young Africa 
Works
Fund size
Purpose To provide much -needed 
financial support to youth 
operating in the Fintech and 
Agritech environment to close 
the access to the funding gap.$ 2.4 million (unsecured loan)
$ 250k (grant)
Target Fintech & Agritech
The 
Mishkan  
Group
100,000Grant beneficiaries (value in GHS).
20ACCESS TO 
FINANCE
During the first half year, innovative products launched include 
the MazzumaGPT  and Ashesi’s African Women Amplified 
platform.  
Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2023), 21H1 PRODUCT 
LAUNCH
22INTERVIEW WITH HANNAH 
BERTILLA ACQUAH, CEO OF GHANA 
VENTURE CAPITAL AND PRIVATE 
EQUITY ASSOCIATION.
Can you please highlight your previous 
experience and how this led to the new 
position as CEO of Ghana Venture Capital 
and Private Equity Association (GVCA)?Can you please highlight your previous 
experience and how this led to the new 
position as CEO of Ghana Venture Capital 
and Private Equity Association (GVCA)?
As the newly appointed CEO of the Ghana Venture Capital and Private
Equity Association (GVCA), my goals are to fortify local ventures and
strategically engage local and international partners and funders to
contribute to the ecosystem’s growth. In achieving these goals, I draw
extensively on my 20+ years of professional experience as a global
businesswoman working across four continents. My youthful exuberance
didnotgo unnoticed.As aresult, Ireceivedseveral awards andaccolades,
such as being recognized in 2013 as one of the 25 faces of the New Africa
BRICSBusinessMagazine.
My time at Acumen Fund as the Head of Business Development for West 
Africa was instrumental in my career. I was able to appreciate theAs the newly appointed CEO of the Ghana Venture Capital and Private
Equity Association (GVCA), my goals are to fortify local ventures and
strategically engage local and international partners and funders to
contribute to the ecosystem’s growth. In achieving these goals, I draw
extensively on my 20+ years of professional experience as a global
businesswoman working across four continents. My youthful exuberance
didnotgo unnoticed.As aresult, Ireceivedseveral awards andaccolades,
such as being recognized in 2013 as one of the 25 faces of the New Africa
BRICSBusinessMagazine.
My time at Acumen Fund as the Head of Business Development for West 
Africa was instrumental in my career. I was able to appreciate theCan you please highlight your previous 
experience and how this led to the new 
position as CEO of Ghana Venture Capital 
and Private Equity Association (GVCA)?
As the newly appointed CEO of the Ghana Venture Capital and Private
Equity Association (GVCA), my goals are to fortify local ventures and
strategically engage local and international partners and funders to
contribute to the ecosystem’s growth. In achieving these goals, I draw
extensively on my 20+ years of professional experience as a global
businesswoman working across four continents. My youthful exuberance
didnotgo unnoticed.As aresult, Ireceivedseveral awards andaccolades,
such as being recognized in 2013 as one of the 25 faces of the New Africa
BRICSBusinessMagazine.
My time at Acumen Fund as the Head of Business Development for West 
Africa was instrumental in my career. I was able to appreciate therelationship between General Partners and portfolio companies and how 
such relationships blossomed through regular communication, 
understanding, trust and integrity.
In addition, having led my own company, TKC Africa, I understand the
opportunities and challenges entrepreneurs face. TKC Africa focuses on
business and investment consulting. I advise international financiers,
including impact investors, venture capitalists and Family Offices, all keen
on exploring opportunities in Ghana (and West Africa). I have worked with
clients whosoughtmyexpertise toguide themthroughthe complexities of
enteringnewmarketsinGhanaandWestAfrica.
In this new role, I aim to contribute to strengthening the GVCA and its 
members and identify local and international financing to enable fund 
managers to invest in all manner of portfolio companies, from ticket sizes 
starting from $50,000 for small investments to significant investments and 
follow on investments for more established ventures.
Source: Innovation Spark with GVCA (2023) This article was transcribed and edited with the help of AI.
23
What  critical  mistakes  or challenges  hindering  
entrepreneurs  from  securing  funding?  
From  my extensive  experience  in the investment  liaison  field,  particularly  between  
Ghana  and  the US, I have  noted  several  vital  mistakes  and  challenges  that  often  
hinder  entrepreneurs  from  successfully  raising  funds  from  foreign  investors . 
Investors  invest  first  in people,  so it is critical  to have  the right  team  and  the right  
board  in place . Too  often,  the product  or service  may  be appealing,  but the 
business  is not “bankable”  because  the leadership  team  is lacking . Another  
primary  challenge  is the need  to equip  venture  teams  with  comprehensive  
knowledge  and  skills  to navigate  the investment  process . Entrepreneurs  should  
strive  to understand  the fundraising  process,  particularly  the required  
documentation  and  strategies  to attract  and  satisfy  investors . Investors  want  to 
invest  in businesses  with  solid  track  records  that  can  be validated . As such,  it is 
essential  to address  any  financial  challenges  and  have  clear  audited  reports,  
keeping  in mind  that  transparency  is crucial  in investor  relations . Entrepreneurs  
must  showcase  integrity,  proving  that  funding  will  be used  for its intended  
purpose . This  fosters  trust,  which  is fundamental  for long -term  financing .
Source: Innovation Spark with AGS (2023) This article was transcribed and edited with the help of AI.
The  Ghana  Venture  Capital  and  Private  Equity  Association  aims  to 
address  these  challenges  by offering  training  opportunities  and  
facilitating  collaboration  with  ecosystem  partners  to enhance  
entrepreneurs'  investment  readiness . By addressing  challenges  
such  as transparency,  financial  preparedness,  and  
communication  skills,  entrepreneurs  can  improve  their  chances  of 
successfully  raising  funds  from  investors . The  GVCA  is committed  
to engaging  global  investors  and  supporting  entrepreneurs  to 
navigate  obstacles  and  seize  viable  investment  opportunities .24 Source: Innovation Spark with AGS (2023) This article was transcribed and edited with the help of AI.
trains  and  promotes  diverse  leaders  – this  includes  women,  
entrepreneurs  with  disabilities  and  entrepreneurs  from  rural  areas .
As the CEO  of GVCA,  I am committed  to providing  the necessary  skills  
and  resources  to help  them  overcome  challenges  and  bottlenecks,  
fostering  a more  inclusive,  diverse  and  vibrant  entrepreneurial  
ecosystem .
Diversity  and inclusion  is a topical  issue  in 
the investment  world . How  can this be 
addressed,  particularly  concerning  
supporting  women  and minority -led 
startups?
I am a member  of the African  Women  Investors  Network,  comprising  over  
150  African  women  investors  actively  addressing  underrepresentation  and  
passionately  driving  positive  change . Many  of these  women  hold  decision -
making  roles,  either  running  their  funds  or leading  as LPs or GPs . They  focus  
on capacity  building  and  training  and  offer  structural  support  to women -led 
portfolio  companies,  ensuring  they  thrive . They  go beyond  by providing  
capital  investment  to these  businesses,  with  a portion  earmarked  for 
women .
There  is an increased  focus  on gender  lens  investing  within  their  broader  
ESG  (environmental,  social,  and  governance)  strategies  as well  as investing  
in line  with  the UN Sustainable  Development  Goals,  in particular  SDG  5. We 
will  only  realize  the true  potential  of Ghanaian  ventures  if we create  an 
inclusive  investment  environment  that  recruits,  Hannah B. Acquah
CEO of Ghana Venture Capital And Private 
Equity Association25 Source: Innovation Spark with AGS (2023) This article was transcribed and edited with the help of AI.
What  motivated  the establishment  of the 
GVCA,  and how  do you envision  its role in 
shaping  the business  ecosystem?
Our  vision  is “to be the voice  of Venture  Capital  and  Private  Equity  Industry  in Ghana .” We 
do this  through  our 6 strategic  mission  pillars : 
•Supporting  investments  into  private  businesses  for job creation  and  national  
economic  development ;
•Increasing  assets  under  management  by attracting  local  and  international  investors ;
•Promoting  standards  and  best  practices  to safeguard  investors  and  investees ;
•Publishing  research  and  data  for market  insights  and  policy -making ;
•Networking  and  stakeholder  engagement ; and
•Training  of industry  practitioners .
The  GVCA  website  is very  detailed,  and  I recommend  individuals  interested  in this  sector  
to visit  the website : www .gvca -ghana .org and  follow  us on our social  media : @gvca -
ghana
Launched  in October  2021 , GVCA  is focused  on ensuring  that  ventures  are connected  with  
local  and  international  partners,  local  funders  and  foundations . Additionally,  we are 
committed  to training  business  professionals  and  building  up the capacity  that  is 
required  to build  a strong  ecosystem . The  association  strives  to be a reliable  resource  for 
anyone  seeking  guidance  in the investment  sector,  focusing  on VC and  PE investments . 
Who  are the current  members  of the 
association?  Is its membership  open  
to other  institutions  besides  venture  
capital  and private  equity  firms?
We have  30+ members  who  are primarily  venture  capital  and  private  
equity  firms . Our  members  include  Oasis  Capital,  Injaro , Zebu  
Investment  Partners  and  the Venture  Capital  Trust  Fund .  We want  to 
work  closely  with  organizations  that  are supporting  entrepreneurs . That  
includes  law  firms  like  AB & David  and  Bentsi -Enchill , Letsa  & Ankomah,  
who  are members ; consulting  firms  such  as Konfidants ; and  pension  
firms  like  Axis  Pension . 
GVCA  is open  to any  institution  involved  in the investment  ecosystem . 
That  includes  banks,  telecommunication  firms,  incubators,  accelerators  
and  insurance  companies . We also  have  global  partners,  such  as 
MasterCard  Foundation  and  British  International  Investment,  who  are 
members  of our advisory  network .To extend the runway, Chipper Cash further downsized 
while Redbird shut down . 
Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2023), TechCrunch (2023), Techcabal  (2023)
The  inability  of startups  to raise  
funding,  coupled  with  the 
current  focus  on profits  rather  
than  growth,  has led to some  
startups  either  downsizing  or 
shutting  down . 
The  health -tech  company  that  
allows  easy  access  to 
convenient  pharmacy  testing  
shut  down . Due  to market  
conditions,  the company  could  
not raise  additional  capital  in 
2022  as it had  exhausted  its 
runway .
Kofi  Nketsia -Tabiri , the CEO  
and  Founder  of XpressGas  
passed  away  unexpectedly .  He 
had  just  turned  48.
In the fintech  market,  Chipper  
Cash , the unicorn  company,  laid  
off over  100 workers  to cut costs . 
The  CEO  of Dash  has  been  
placed  on indefinite  
administrative  leave  pending  a 
forensic  financial  audit .
26GLOOMY 
MOMENTS
Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2023),These  are the key 
highlights  within  the 
entrepreneurial  ecosystem  
for the first  half  of 2023 .
Ghana Fintech Awards held  
Jetstream raises $13 million pre -
series ADash’s CEO placed on indefinite 
administrative leave for alleged 
financial impropriety
UCC’s Dr. Stephen Moore awarded 
$30,000 Google research grant 
Vodafone Ghana completes sale to 
Telecel  GroupMarch: MTN cuts sod for the $25 
million Ghana Innovation Hub
March: FloodGates  Limited wins 
Tech4Democracy Venture Day 
Africa Competition
March:  Accra Technical University 
wins $152,869 grant to undertake 
innovative research in healthBank of Ghana opens its regulatory 
sandboxGovernment launches an 
electronic pharmacy platform.
27ECOSYSTEM 
HIGHLIGHTS Q1 February March January 2023
Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2023),These  are the key 
highlights  within  the 
entrepreneurial  ecosystem  
for the first  half  2023 .
Wangara Capital Invests $500,000 in 
North Lite Solar
Maiden Ghana Venture Capital and 
Private Equity Association 
conference heldGhana Startup Bill final stakeholder 
engagement meeting
Kodu Technology wins the 2023 
Circular Economy Competition
Kofa raises seed funding to launch 
intelligent battery -swapping 
network in Ghana1stedition of the Sankalp West 
Africa Summit held in Accra
UNICEF Startup Lab graduates 20 
startups
Tech in Ghana - LondonViamo land $4m from Bill & 
Melinda Gates FoundationSolarTaxi  granted EV assembling  
license
28May June April
ECOSYSTEM 
HIGHLIGHTS 
Q2Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2023)These are key ecosystem
events upcoming in the
restof2023.Africa Bitcoin Conference 
(1st–3rd)
Diaspora to Ghana for Business 
Workshop (14th)
Bar Camp Accra 
(16th)Women in Agribusiness Week 
(13th)Ghana Digital Innovation Week 
(6th–8th)
30December November 2023FUTURE 
ECOSYSTEM 
EVENTS Q4
Connected Banking Summit 
(15th)
The Corporate Women in 
Leadership Summit (16th)
Tech in Ghana 
(28th–29th)
Global Cyber Capacity Building 
2023 (29th–30th)Tech Connect Accra 
(27th)Source: Ghana Innovation Journal (2023)These are key ecosystem
events upcoming in the
restof2023.ANDE Annual Conference 
(12th–14th)
Ghana ESO Forum 
(15th)
6th Ghana Industrial Summit & 
Exhibition (18th–20th)West African Money and Defi
(3rd–4th)
Industry -Academia Agritech
Summit (24th)Agricultural Innovation for Africa 
Conference (17th–18th)
29September October August 2023FUTURE 
ECOSYSTEM 
EVENTS Q3
TribaverseGreen Festival 
(23rd)
Ghana Tech Summit 
(29th)31METHODOLOGY
The  Ghana  Innovation  Journal  Report  H1 2023  is based  on data  gathered  by the 
media  arm  of The  Innovation  Spark  for the first  half  of 2023 . 
•The  data  collected,  analyzed  and  presented  in our research  came  from  two  
sources : 
•Desk -based  research : data  from  the public,  i.e., products,  features,  and  
funding  publicly  announced  by ecosystem  stakeholders . 
•Interviews : Key  actors  were  also  interviewed  to validate  some  
information . We were  privileged  to be informed  of confidential  deals  
due  to our relationship  with  various  entities . 
•The  startups  considered  in the report  are either  technology  or tech -enabled,  
which  have  raised  at least  $10,000 in equity  or debt  in 2022 . 
•For the fundraising  analysis,  we only  cover  Ghanaian  startups . We define  these  
as startups  whose  primary  or first  market  after  launching  is Ghana  or whose  
headquarters  is in Ghana . 
•The  report  is not exhaustive,  and  its goal  is to provide  a picture  of the current  
state  of the Ghanaian  startup  ecosystem  and  map  how  it evolves .•Considering  the opaque  nature  of the Ghanaian  
market,  we strive  to constantly  update  our data  to 
maintain  accuracy . If you  spot  an error  or 
inaccuracy,  please  email  
report@theinnovationspark .com .
•Any  part  of this  publication  may  be copied,  
translated  into  other  languages  or adapted  to meet  
local  needs  without  prior  permission  from  the 
Innovation  Spark,  provided  the work  is 
appropriately  cited . Scope and Methodology Data and assurance integrity
THE 
INNOVATION 
SPARK PROFILEWe offer tailor -made consultation, media services and business 
development for entrepreneurial ventures.
BUSINESS ADVISORY
& CONSULTING
We design curriculums and 
implement Incubation and 
Accelerator programs for hubs, 
incubators and accelerators.
This includes defining the program, 
recruiting consultants, startups and 
partner institutions.
Programs include early -stage 
incubation, growth -stage acceleration 
and thematic boot camps.Enterprise Support Services
Startup Support Services
We provide ideation, coaching and 
implementation services for 
entrepreneurs and innovative 
ventures across the continent. This 
ranges from opportunity mapping, 
and market entry to incorporation 
and recruitment.INVESTMENT 
FACILITATION
We proactively source innovative 
companies and support angel 
investor networks and venture capital 
firms looking for viable startups that 
fit their investment thesis across both 
tech and non -tech fields.Venture Scouting
Investor Readiness Services
We provide investor readiness boot 
camps directly and through our 
partner programs. Our unique 
methodologies involve a 360 
assessment of their financials, tech 
stack, operational management, 
team structure, etc. to position them 
for investment.DIGITAL CONTENT
& MEDIA PRODUCTION
We create and curate sought -after 
content that provides exposure to 
ecosystems and startups. 
We advise on the creation of various 
digital content across a range of social 
media platforms, from traditional to 
digital media.Digital Content
Media Production
We invest in creative projects. We 
are the executive producers in a 
range of media and fashion 
productions, including music, 
fashion shows, movies and TV series.
32BESPOKE 
SERVICES
Our innovation research products help 
companies and individuals identify on -
the-ground realities, trends and 
opportunities in innovation.
Our detailed database provides insights 
into the dynamics of early -stage 
financing in Ghana and the continent.
We provide bespoke  industry, product 
and user market research.Innovation Research
Stakeholder Engagement
Our rich network of partners 
positions us to facilitate B2B 
meetings, product activations and 
client & partner identification. This 
includes strategic introductions, 
meet & greet sessions and round 
table events with key stakeholders 
in the ecosystem.33GHANA 
INNOVATION 
JOURNAL 
PORTFOLIOOur data-driven media platforms spotlight remarkable 
individuals and innovative ventures in the tech and innovation 
industry.
GHANA INNOVATION 
JOURNALSTARTUP PROFILE EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES AFROINNOV8ORS
Investigating, informing, and 
inspiring the startup ecosystem 
while bridging information gaps 
while we journal wins.Spotlighting founders, sharing 
their entrepreneurial journeys, 
challenges, and triumphs along 
their career.Exploring the latest 
developments in AI, Web3, 
Cybersecurity, and other 
emerging tech fields.Fostering connections and 
collaboration among African 
innovators across the 
continent's thriving ecosystem.
HERSTORY
Celebrating and showcasing 
the accomplishments of female 
entrepreneurs, business 
leaders, and changemakers. 
PERSPECTIVE
Engaging in meaningful 
discussions on various topics 
with experts from diverse 
backgrounds and viewpoints.
34www.theinnovationspark.com | Discover more online
report@theinnovationspark.com | Got a comment on the report?
partnerships@theinnovationspark.com | Want to support GIJ oroneit’s shows
The Ghana Innovation Journal is a product of The Innovation Spark | #Ideate #Innovate #ImplementFollow us on all channels @ghinnojournal


Extracted from: Ghana-Startup-Ecosystem-Primer-2023--Accra-Angels-Innohub-Asime-Ventures--The-Innovation-Spark.pdf
November 2023Ghana Startup 
Ecosystem Primer
Table of content Slide no
0. About Accra Angels Network 1
1. Overview of the ecosystem 3 –12 
• Key insights
• Ecosystem strengths
• Ghana’s position in Africa
• Leading industries
• Hubs & Accelerators
• Public & private -sector initiatives3 –4 
5
6
7
8 –10
11 –12 
2. Case study (Jetstream, Zeepay & Wewire Africa) 14 –16 
3. Challenges 18 –19 
4. Recommendations 21 –22 
5. Good signals 23Accra  Angels  Network  provides  the platform  for mid -to-high  net-worth  individuals  or institutions  to invest  their  funds  and  
resources  in Ghanaian -based  early -stage  businesses  with  significant  growth  potential,  a latent  ability  to generate  
disproportionate  returns  and  demonstrable  social  and  economic  impact .
The  Innovation  Spark  is an enabler  in the African  startup  ecosystem . We fuel  growth  by providing  innovation  consulting,  
media  exposure and business  advisory . We produce  data -driven  reports  across  essential  sectors,  themes  and  geographies . 
Asime  Ventures  is the preferred  angel,  seed  and  pre-Series  A firm  with  a reputation  for successful  partnerships  across  Africa,  
both  Anglophone  and  Francophone .
For all enquires and media engagement, send an email to reports@theinnovationspark.comPartners
Innohub  is a Business  Accelerator,  Management  Consulting,  and  Impact  Investment  platform  which  supports  Small  and  
Growing  Businesses  to become  sustainable,  scalable  and  investment -ready  and  matches  them  to the capital  needed  for 
growth .1
Investment thesis Target ticket size
Stage focusWhat we look for Sector of interest
We invest  in Ghana -based  
early -stage  businesses  with  
significant  growth  potential,  a 
latent  ability  to generate  
disproportionate  returns  and  
demonstrable  social  and  
economic  impact .$10,000 – $250,000 •Sector  agnostic  with  a 
primary  focus  on Fintech,  
Healthtech,  Agtech,  etc.
MVP to Seed•The  company  should  not be 
older  than  7 years
•A business  that  can  scale
•Management  team  or 
structure  in place
•Clearly  defined  market  
opportunity
•Demonstrates  growth  and  
impact  potentialServices additional to 
funding
• Long -term  partnership
• Mentorship  and  advisory
• Access  to the corporate  
and  investor  network
• Follow -on fundingAverage time to close 
a deal
3 – 6  monthsGeo focus
Ghana and AfricaBusiness focus
•Technology startups
• Tech -enabled SMEs 
/SBGs1 About Accra Angels 
NetworkAccra  Angels  Network  aims  to back  high -growth  scalable  tech  
and tech -enabled  companies  in Ghana . •Overview of the ecosystemSource: The startup investment raised is data extrapolated from:  Innovation Spark Gold Rush Database (20219 - 2022), Africa: The  Big Deal (2019 – 2022), Partech Africa VC Report (2019 – 2022);  
DataReportal  (2023): Digital Ghana report; Ghana Statistical Service (2015): Integrated Business Establishment Survey 500+  
Active no. of startups countrywide$542 m+
Total startup funding raised
2019 - 2022
Fintech
Most funded industry  (# of deals)
2019 - 2022 Healthtech
Next funded industry
2019 - 2022 $ 0.5 m 
Median deal size across all industries3
97+
Number of deals
2019 - 2022 Key 
InsightsThe impressive  56% CAGR  in funding  growth  over  the last four  
years  affirms  Ghana’s  position  as an attractive  startup  hub .Source: DataReportal  (2023): Digital Ghana report, Ghana Statistical Service (2015): Integrated Business Establishment Survey 25%  
Number of startups with at least one 
female co -founder73+
Number of investors who invested in 
startups in Ghana (2019 -2022)100+
Technology & Innovation Hubs
23.1 m
Number of Internet users in Ghana 
as of February 202343.8 m
Number of mobile cellular 
connections
(vs. 32.8m population in 2021)2.1 m+
Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises4 Key 
InsightsVarious  economic  and demographic  enablers  underpin  this 
impressive  growth .Increasing startup 
support servicesIncreasing 
entrepreneurial spirit 
hence an increase in the 
number of tech startups
Young tech -
savvy talentHigh internet and 
mobile  penetration 
rate in Sub -Saharan 
Africa
Access to formal financial 
services increased 
significantly from 41% to 
68% between 2014 and 
2021Decentralized 
startup 
ecosystemKey 
strengths of 
the startup 
ecosystem
Politically stable 
governance 
5
Source: The Global Findex Database (2022), Innovation Spark research (2023)Ecosystem 
strengthsGhana’s  ecosystem  growth  is due to an increasing  
entrepreneurial  spirit  of the young  tech -savvy  population  and 
a high  internet  and mobile  penetration  rate . 
AfCFTA Headquarters and 
gateway to Africa
Kenya
Nigeria
South Africa
Egypt
Tanzania
Ghana
Senegal
Tunisia
Algeria
Africa’s Big Four (Africa’s leading VC market, 2019 – 2022) The Next Five (Africa’s top VC markets, 2019 – 2022)6
Source: The Ghana startup funding data is extrapolated from Innovation Spark Gold Rush Database (20219 - 2022), Africa: The Big Deal Data base  (2019 – 2022), Partech Africa VC Report (2019 – 2022$4.03 bn
$2.2 bn$2.4 bn$2 bn$0.18 bn
$0.35 bn
$0.5 bn$0.2 bn$0.6 bnGhana’s position in 
AfricaGhana  is the top destination  for startup  investments  among  
the “Next  Five”  African  countries .Fundraising per industry (2019 – 2022, inc. mPharma , value in %)
 Fundraising per industry (ex. mPharma )7
Source: Africa: The Big Deal (2019 – 2022)Leading 
industriesFintech  and Healthcare  are the most  preferred  for investors,  
even  though  Agtech  seems  to be popular .Source: Innovation Spark Database (2023), Ghana Tech Lab (2022) Image credit: Ministry of Local Government and Rural Developm ent (2020) •Accra  is Ghana’s  most  active  startup  city,  followed  by Kumasi  and  Takoradi . 
•From  our observation,  Accra’s  ecosystem  comprises  the East  Legon  and  Osu  clusters . 
•The  East  Legon  cluster  spreads  across  East  Legon  and  the Airport  environs . Tier-1 hubs  in this  cluster  include  
MEST  Africa,  Innohub , Kosmos  Innovation  Center  and  iSpace  Foundation . 
•The  Osu  cluster  spreads  across  the Osu  and  Ringway  communities . Key  hubs  in the Osu  cluster  are Impact  
Hub , SG Innovate  and  Ghana  Innovation  Hub .
Hubs & 
AcceleratorsThere  are over  100 hubs  and accelerators  spread  across  Ghana . 8Tamale : University of Development Studies, 
Business Innovations and Incubation Center
Koforidua : Koforidua Technical University, 
Centre Of Entrepreneurship And Innovation 
Development
Brekuso : Ashesi University, Ashesi Venture 
Incubator
Accra : University of Ghana, UGBS Nest
Accra : Academic City University College, 
Connecting Climate Entrepreneurs 
Sustainability Lab
Accra : University of Professional Studies, 
Enterprise and Innovation Centre Venture Lab
Cape Coast : University of Cape Coast, Design 
Thinking and Innovation Hub
Cape Coast : Cape Coast Technical University, 
Department Of Entrepreneurship And 
Agribusiness  
Takoradi : Takoradi Technical University, 
CELLIBS Innovation Hub 
Sunyani : University of Energy and Natural 
Resource, Centre for Entrepreneurship and 
Business Incubation
Kumasi : Kwame Nkrumah University for Science 
and Technology, Kumasi Innovation Hub
Kumasi : Valley View University, Kumasi, Kumasi 
City Innovation Hub
Kumasi : Kumasi Institute of Tropical 
Agriculture, KITA Agribusiness Incubator9
Source: Innovation Spark Research (2023), Image credit: Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development (2020) University Hubs & 
AcceleratorsUniversity Hubs & 
AcceleratorsUniversities  are setting  up innovation  hubs  to nurture  the 
entrepreneurial  capabilities  of students . Kwabeng  Robotics  and  
Mentorship  Hub
Google  launched  its first  
African  AI research  centre  in 
Ghana  in 2018  to support  
researchers  with  the relevant  
tools  and  opportunities  to 
develop  AI products  to solve  
Africa’s  numerous  problems .   10
Source: Innovation Spark Research (2023), Image credit: Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development (2020) Robotics & STEM 
HubsThe next  generation  of innovation  hubs  are training  and 
supporting  artificial  intelligence  and robotics  solutions .
The Ghana Startup and 
Innovation BillReview of Ghana Investment 
Promotion Centre Act
The  bill seeks  to create  an enabling  startup  
environment  by removing  barriers  and  
providing  incentives  and support  systems . The  
technical  committee  is working  with  the 
Ministry  of Communication  and  Digitalization  
to submit  the bill to Parliament  by the end  of 
the year .Recapitalization of  Venture Capital 
Trust Fund
The  Ghana  Investment  Promotion  Centre  is 
reviewing  its underpinning  laws  to position  
Ghana  as the most  attractive  investment  
destination . Regulations  on technology  
transfer,  minimum  capital,  etc., are expected  to 
be reviewed .  The  draft  document  is before  the 
cabinet . Through  the Ghana  Economic  Transformation  
Project,  the state’s  fund -of-fund  vehicle,  VCTF  
received  a $40 million  boost  to finance  fund  
managers  investing  in startups  and  SMEs  in 
Ghana . 
Passage of the new Companies Act, 
2019
The  act enhances  the ease  of doing  business,  
brings  the global  best  practices  to bear,  and  
has significant  positive  implications  on the 
business  environment . It promotes  prudence  
in management,  effective  boardroom  practice,  
and  shareholder  activism .The Digital Finance 
Policy
This  policy  sets  out a vision  for a resilient,  
inclusive  and  innovative  digital  finance  service  
ecosystem  by improving  governance,  
supporting  fintech,  creating  an enabling  
regulatory  framework  and  supporting  market  
infrastructure  development .Ghana Innovation and Research 
Commercialization Centre
The  GIRC  Centre  serves  as the heart  of research  
and  innovation  to pump  life into  research  
institutions,   innovators,  and  academia  by 
linking  them  to incubator  hubs,  donor  agencies  
and  businesses  to commercialize  research  and  
innovation  outcomes .11
Source: Innovation Spark Research (2023), Graphic Business (2019): Ghana Gets New Companies Act, Ministry Finance (2020): Dig ital Finance Policy, MESTI (2021) Public and private -
sector initiativesGhana  is pursuing  a range  of policies  and government -
coordinated  initiatives  to spur  innovation . NEIP  is a policy  initiative  to provide  integrated  
support  for start -ups  and  small  businesses,  
focusing  on the provision  of business  
development  services,  business  incubators,  
and  funding  for youth -owned  businessesThe  programme  is to support  the development  
of the entrepreneurship  ecosystem  by building  
the capacities  of entrepreneurship  hubs  to 
bring  the quality  of their  services  up to 
international  standards .12
The Ghana Digital
Innovation Week 
The  platform  celebrates  the accomplishments  
of Ghana's  digital  innovation  ecosystem  and  
mobilizes  diverse  digital  ecosystem  
stakeholders  towards  more  collaborative  and  
inclusive  ecosystem  development .The NEIP Hubs 
Grant ProgrammeThe National Entrepreneurship and 
Innovation Programme
Source: Innovation Spark Research (2023), NEIP Hubs Grant Programme (2023)Public and private -
sector initiativesGhana  is pursuing  a range  of policies  and government -
coordinated  initiatives  to spur  innovation . 
ABSA Bank/ Mastercard 
SME Loan
The  initiative  enables  women -owned  
businesses,  young  entrepreneurs,  
agribusinesses,  and  fintechs  to borrow  up to 
GHS 11 million  at a concessionary  rate  of 10%, 
without  collateral .MTN ICT Hub 
MTN  Ghana  is constructing  a $25 million  ICT 
hub  in Accra . This  forms  part  of MTN's  Ghana  
Innovation  Hub  initiative,  which  aims  to train  
over  200,000 youths  in ICT and  digital  skills  
and  is expected  to generate  more  than  
100,000 jobs  within  three  years . Fidelity Young Entrepreneurs 
Fund
The  FYEI  is Fidelity  Bank’s  GHS  10 Million  
initiative,  which  provides  seed  capital/soft  
loans  at concessionary  rates  (10%) with  
flexible  repayment  terms  backed  by business  
management  training  support  to the 
startups/SMEs . •Case studyMilestones•Jetstream  grew  its trade  finance  
portfolio  from  the $1 million  debt  it 
secured  in mid -2021  to about  $9 
million  in total  loans . ²
•Revenue  has grown  48%, and  active  
customers  102% within  the past  
year . ²
Funding
history•Total  disclosed  funding : $16.1 
million . 
•$13 m Pre-Series  A
•$3 m Seed
•$0.11 m Grant
Selected
Investor (s)14
Founder(s)• Miishe  Addy  (CEO)
•Solomon Torgbor (COO)
Industry •Logistics  
Founding Year •2018
Stage •Pre-Series  A
Business model •B2B
Employees No.•44¹
Geographic
reach•Present  in 29 countries,  including  12 
African  markets . ²
About•Jetstream  is an e-logistics  vertically  
integrated  company  that  provides  
cross -border  trade  solutions  that  ease  
exports  across  Africa  through  its 
technology -enabled  freight  
forwarding,  trade  financing  and  
insurance,  and  cargo  tracking  tools  for 
African  businesses .Founding story
•Jetstream  Africa  was  founded  in 2018  
by  Miishe  Addy  and  Solomon  Torgbo .
•Prior  to Jetstream,  Miishe  was  a 
Business  Teaching   Fellow  at Meltwater  
Entrepreneurial  School  of Technology  
(MEST) . Before  MEST,  she worked  for 
Bain  & Company,  while  Solomon  
worked  at Maersk’s  freight  forwarding  
subsidiary  Damco . 
•Jetstream  started  as a logistics  
company  for cosmetics  manufacturers  
in South  Africa . Later,  it pivoted  to a 
less -than -container -load  model  to 
aggregate  shipments  in small  quantities  
that  cannot  occupy  the whole  
container .  In 2020 , it expanded  its 
offerings  by providing  trade  finance  to 
customers . Currently,  it provides  end -
to-end  solutions  for the freight  
forwarding  ecosystem .
Source: 1. Techcrunch  (2021) Ghana’s Jetstream lands $3m, 2. Techcrunch  (2023) Jetstream takes -in-13m -equity, Techpoint  (2021) Ghana -based Jetstream raises $3mCase Study: 
JetstreamJetstream  Africa  is transforming  the freight  forwarding  
landscape  by offering  an end-to-end solution  for cargo  
movement . Milestones•Zeepay’s  total  processed  volume  
surged  from  US$1.9 billion  in 2021  
to an impressive  US$2.9 billion  in 
2022 . ²
•Revenue  has grown  from  GH¢39.4 
million  (~$6.6 m)in  2021  to GH¢96.4 
million  (~9.5 m) in 2022  ²
•Profit  after  tax grew  by 274.5% from  
GH¢8.76 million  (~ $1.4 m) in 2021  to 
GH¢32.8 million  (~ $ 3.2 m).
Funding
history•Total  disclosed  funding : $20 
million+ .
•$10 million  Series  A.5 (Debt)
•$7.9 million  Series  A (Equity  
+ Debt)
•$0.94 million  Seed  (Equity)
Selected
Investor (s)15
Founder(s) • Andrew  Takyi -Appiah  (CEO)
Industry •Fintech
Founding Year •2016
Stage •Series  A
Business model •B2C & B2B 
Employees No.•118¹
Geographic
reach•Present  in 20 African  countries  with  
termination  agreements  in over  90 
jurisdictions  globally .
About•Zeepay  is a mobile  financial  service  
company  specializing  in remittance  
termination  into  mobile  wallets . It also  
enables  individuals  and  businesses  to 
operate  the whole  bouquet  of mobile  
money  services  such  as cash -in-cash -
out,  peer -to-peer  transfers  and  
payments .Founding story
• Before  setting  up Zeepay,  Andrew  had  
over  15 years  of experience  spanning  
Transaction,  Retail  and  Corporate  
Banking,  and  Strategy  and  Business  
Performance . 
•He has been  part  of retail  deployments  
across  Africa,  in East,  South  and  West  
Africa  and  worked  on switch  integration  
projects  in Rwanda,  South  Africa,  
Uganda,  Kenya,  Burundi,  Malawi,  
Zambia  and  Ghana .
•The  idea  came  to him  after  closing  a 
deal  in South  Africa,  and  he thought  
about  the possibility  of building  a 
payment  system  that  is independent  of 
mobile  networks
Source: 1. Zeepay’ (2023) Company LinkedIn; 2. Techfocus24 (2023) Zeepay holds 10th AGM; Exchange rate used  $1: GHS5.9, (2021), $1, GHS 10.1 (2022 )
Case Study: 
Zeepay Zeepay  facilitates  cross -border  remittances  to mobile  money  
wallets . Milestones•Processed  over  $400 million²  in 
transaction  volume  since  2021
•Operate  an MSB  license  in Canada .
Funding
history•Undisclosed
Investor (s)•Undisclosed16
Founder (s) •Ebenezer Ghanney  (CEO)
Industry •Fintech
Founding Year •2022
Stage •Pre-seed
Business model •B2B
Employees No.•19¹
Geographic
reach•Present in Ghana, Nigeria, Kenya, 
Uganda, USA, UAE and the UK.
About•Wewire  Africa  is a multi -currency  
payment  platform  designed  to 
empower  businesses  engaged  in 
international  trade . It enables  
businesses  to conduct  transactions  
globally . 
•It leverages  digital  technologies  and  
blockchain  to expedite  cross -border  
transactions .Founding story
•Wewire  Africa  was  founded  in 2021  by 
Ebenezer  Ghanney . 
•Prior  to Wewire  Africa,  Ebenezer  was  the 
Ghana  Operations  Manager  for Africa’s  
largest  crypto  exchange,  Yellow  Card . 
He built  their  operations  from  a user  
base  of 0 to 150 ,000+ before  leaving  in 
April  2022 .
• While  at Yellow  Card,  he observed  the 
growing  need  for businesses  to make  
cross -border  payments . He thus  built  
Wewire  as an over -the-counter  desk  for 
forex  transactions .  
•In April  2022 , he officially  started  
building  a technical  solution  to the 
challenges  associated  with  cross -border  
transactions . 
Source: 1. Techestate  (2023) Interview with Ebenezer Ghanney ; 2. Africa Money & Defi Summit (2023), Transforming Cross -Border PaymentsCase Study: Wewire 
AfricaWewire  Africa  is revolutionizing  international  trade  by breaking  
down  financial  barriers . •Challenges18
Source: Weetracker  (2023) Float Fintech Startup Scandal; Weetracker  (2023), Deception At Dash: How USD 80 M+ In Funding Went Down The Drain; Modern Ghana (2022), Husband and wife admit taking $ 650 K Allegations  of financial  impropriety  have  rocked  the foundation  
of some  well -funded  fintechs,  casting  a showdown  over  
fintechs  in Ghana  and Africa .Challenges
• Although these events are scandalous, it is not unique to Ghana and Africa, but they mirror most growing ecosystems where bot h good and bad actors can be found. 
• To limit such scandals, international investors must rely on local investors and angels to facilitate due diligence and mitig ate risks.   Limited access 
to fina nceLimited digitally 
skilled talent
Deteriorating 
business 
environmentLow consumer 
purchasing power
Complex and rigid 
regulatory 
environmentLack of 
collaboration 
among startupsTop 
challenges 
faced by 
startups
Inadequate data 
communications 
infrastructure
Obstructive bureaucracy 
in business registration 
processes19
Source: Innovation Spark Research (2023), MEST Africa (2022) - The Ghanaian Ecosystem of Tech Startups and SMEsChallengesSeveral  structural  barriers  make  Ghana  challenging  for tech  
entrepreneurs  and investors . •Recommendations21
• Access  to funding  is the elephant  in the room . A tech -focused  fund  that  provides  catalytic  capital  is essential . 
80% of the startups  in Ghana  are pre-Series  A. It is rare  for Ghanaian  startups  to raise  more  than  $1m in 
equity . As such,  only  a handful  of startups  scale  beyond  100 k- $ 1m in revenue . Hence,  the lagging  tech  
ecosystem  in Ghana . 
• A national  professionally  managed  dedicated  seed  stage  catalytic  $10 million  fund  is needed . The  fund  will  
back  at least  50 startups  annually  for three  years . Leveraging  local  capital  to derisk  early -stage  startups  will  
provide  a pipeline  for institutional  investors  who  mostly  participate  in growth/late -stage  deals . Provide capital to 
Ghana -domiciled 
early -stage 
technology funds
Pass and implement 
the Ghana Startup 
and Innovation Act• A Startup  and  Innovation  Act will provide  a legal  framework  that  defines  a startup  and  create  specific  
incentives  to encourage  the creation  and  development  of startups  in Ghana  to drive  economic  growth .
• A consistent  and  predictable  legislative  framework  will attract  investors  and  significantly  improve  the 
business  environment . 
• Enabling  limited  partnerships,  a globally  recognized  PE/VC  fund  structure,  will allow  the general  partners  to 
have  unlimited  liability  while  the limited  partners  have  limited  liability,  i.e., they  cannot  lose  their  assets  
against  the fund’s  losses  or debts . A conducive  legal  environment  makes  Ghana  attractive  for private  funds  
and  a destination  for domicile  funds .
• The  GIPC  capital  requirement  of $200,000 for foreign  investors  should  be repealed  as it deters  foreign  angel  
investors  from  startup  deals .Introduce investor -
friendly regulations1
2
3
Source: Innovation Spark interviews with ecosystem players (2023), UK EIS, SEIS and SI Tax Relief Statistics (2022) RecommendationsForging  ahead  requires  deliberate  and concerted  efforts  like 
passing  the Startup  Act and funding  startups .22
• Crowdfunding  will serve  as an alternative  funding  source  for startups . Crowdfunding  will enable  individual  
investors  to participate  in smaller  ticket  deals,  providing  them  with  alternative/high  return  investment  
avenues  unlike  the traditional  investment  vehicles  currently  on the market  . Fast -tracking  the pending  
investment  crowdfunding  policy  implementation  will boost  the entrepreneurial  ecosystem . 
• The  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  should  also  explore  bilateral  cooperations  with  other  African  
countries  with  crowdfunding  markets  so Ghanaian  startups  can  tap into  such  markets . Implement guidelines 
for equity 
crowdfunding
Tax Incentives• Foreign  and  local  investors  should  be granted  tax reliefs  to encourage  investment  into  early -stage,  unlisted  
companies . 
• Globally,  there  are various  models  that  can  be adapted . For instance,  in the UK, almost  6,000 companies  
raised  £1.8+ billion  in 2020 /2021  from  individual  investors  through  the UK’s  Seed  Enterprise  Investment  
Scheme  and  the Enterprise  Investment  Scheme . Investors  benefit  from  up to 30% income  tax relief,  among  
other  reliefs .4
5
Source: Innovation Spark interviews with ecosystem players (2023), UK EIS, SEIS and SI Tax Relief Statistics (2022) Recommendations... and implementing  investor -friendly  policies .Local  private  equity  firms  are investing  in tech  companies . 
Hopefully,  this trend  will continue  in 2024 .23
 Good signals: 
crossover
investmentswww.theinnovationspark.com  | Social Handle: @theinnovationspark
www.asimeventures.com   | Social Handle: @asime ventures
www.accraangels.org   | Social Handle: @accraangelsnetwork      
For all enquires and media engagement, send an email to reports@theinnovationspark.com
www.innohub.com.gh| Social Handle: @innohubconnect


Extracted from: The-Ghana-Innovation-Journal-Ghana-Half-Year-Report-2022.pdf
Ghana Startup Ecosystem 
Half-Year Report 2022
Ghana Innovation Journal
iBlitz Media
“One of the critical elements of a successful 
digital ecosystem is recorded wins”
Ada Sowho
Chief Marketing Officer
MTN Nigeria
2Table of Content
3
Executive Summary
TheGhana Innovation Journal Ghana HalfYearReport 2022 highlights theincredible riseintheecosystem's growth .The
year began enthusiastically, with startups raising over USD 55million inJanuary .While fintech continues tobethe
dominant sector, themost significant raise forthefirsthalfyearwasmPharma's (ahealthtech) $35million .
With theteam embedded intheinnovation scene forthepastyears invarious ways, from executing innovative ideas
andparticipating instartup programs, setting upinnovation hubs, launching programs, andrunning accelerators, The
Innovation Spark hasfront-rowseats tothedevelopments ontheground .Over thelasttwoyears, wehavetaken astep
further injournaling and"recording wins" intheecosystem .
Thereport seeks toenlighten andeducate various stakeholders about what ishappening across thescene, from
highlighting thefounding journeys ofmultiple startups andemerging hubs springing upacross thecountry andcreating
oversight ofthelandscape oftheecosystem actors ranging from investors, accelerators, anddevelopment partners to
media .Over thehalfyear, success stories ofGhanaian companies likeZeepay andSnooCode expanded outofGhana .
Various universities andgovernment agencies areexploring programs thatwould significantly change thelandscape on
thepublic sector front.Forinstance, theMinistry ofCommunication andDigitalization ischampioning theStartup Bill,
while theSecurities Exchange Commission backs theequity crowdfunding policy .
Asanecosystem enabler, weaimtohighlight thesignificant accomplishments ofGhanaians both athome andinthe
diaspora .Weseek toprovide aspotlight onstartups andentrepreneurs, spark conversations andempower investors
withclear insights intothecountry .
Weencourage youtoshare thereport with anyone seeking insights andletusknow your thoughts about thevarious
topics covered .
-TheInnovation Spark T eam
4Objectives and Scope
Objective
•Thiswork aims tojournal thewins andjourney oftheGhanaian startup ecosystem .
The Innovation Spark deliberately collects avast array ofdata points onthe
ecosystem .We anticipate providing aone-stop platform where stakeholders
(founders, students, policymakers orbusiness support organizations) canaccess data
fordecision -making .Weenvision afuture where allinterventions oractions taken in
theecosystem arebased ondata-driven facts.
Scope & methodology
•TheGhana Innovation Journal HalfYear Report 2022 isbased ondata gathered by
theiBlitz (themedia armofTheInnovation Spark) team over thefirstsixmonths
(January -June) of2022.
•Theinformation collected, analysed andpresented inourresearch came from two
sources :
•Desk -based research :data from public media, i.e.,products, features, and
funding publicly announced byecosystem stakeholders .
•Interviews :Keyactors were alsointerviewed tovalidate some information .We
hadtheprivilege ofbeing informed ofsome confidential deals duetoour
relationship withvarious entities .
•Thestartups considered inthereport areeither technology ortech-enabled startups
which haveraised .
•Thereport isnotexhaustive, anditsgoalistoprovide apicture ofthecurrent state
oftheGhanaian startup ecosystem andmaphowitevolves .
5Table of Content
6
Ghana ranks favourably in some enabling factors; however, more needs to be done to provide a 
conducive business environment for entrepreneurs.
Digital Infrastructure
 Digital Talent
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook Database (2022), Worldwide Governance Indicators (2022), World Bank Economic Indicators (2022), Global Talent Competitive Index (2021), TechPo intIntelligence (20222), Dealbase Africa Database (2022), The Big Deal Database (2022)  30365870
KenyaNigeriaGhanaSouth AfricaInternet Penetration
(2020, in %)
Ecosystem Enablers
108969467
NigeriaKenyaGhanaSouth AfricaGlobal Talent 
Competitive Ranking
(rank, out of 134 countries 
globally, 2021)
Regulation
3030302827
5556545152
20202018201520122010Regulatory Quality Score 
(2010 –2020, in %)
Ghana Sub-Saharan AfricaTable of Content
8
2008 2009 2010 201120132014 20152016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Year establishedSource: Website of the various hubs (2022)Technology and Innovation Hubs
Comment
•T ech and innovation hubs are the
backbone toGhana’s startup ecosystem .
The emergence ofanentrepreneurship
ecosystem began withthefounding ofhubs
likeMEST Africa, Impact Hub, andiSpace .
Over theyears, these hubs have nurtured,
developed, and connected startups to
markets, investors, andmentors .
•Hubs arealsoadecentralized approach to
spread innovation .Hubs have an
exponential effect onecosystems .
•Ghana has70+tech andinnovation hubs
from justtwoin2008.
9
Source: The Innovation Spark Database (2022)Landscape of The Ecosystem
An increasing number of ecosystem builders are acting as enablers in the ecosystem.
*Not an exhaustive list
Ghana 
startup 
ecosystemAccelerator and incubator InvestorsCompetition & Events Ancillary Support
Academia and Universities Development Partners
Private sector and Advocacy 
associationsGovernment initiatives
Table of Content
11
Funding Overview: Key Insights
Source: Gold Rush Database (2022)*Female -founded = startup with at least one female co -founder 12$187m+
Total amount of 
funding raised by 
startups20+
 9%
 44% $ 31m
Total amount of debt 
funding raised by 
startupsTotal deal countDistribution of *female -
founded startups which 
got fundedThe Fintech industry 
grabbed the most 
fundingFintech grabbed over 44% of investment, followed by healthtech and agritechGold Rush Tracker: Funding Overview
Investment by sector
(January –June 2022, in million USD)
Fintech
44.26%Healthtech
25.60%Agtech
12.27%Internet 
infrastructure
10.67%
Logistics
5.33%
Cleantech
1.60%
E-commerce
0.27%
Edtech
0.01%
Source: Gold Rush Database (2022)Total
$187m
Investment by month
(January –June 2022, in  million USD)
Comment
•Forthehalfyearof2022,Ghana startup ecosystem hasseen total investment ofover $187million through 17disclosed and3undisclosed deals.
•January recorded thehighest amount offunding ($55.5million) whiles March recorded thehighest number ofdeals (6).
13Founder Gender Breakdown
Deal value & count by gender 
(January –June 2022, in %)
Source: Gold Rush Database (2022)
Comment
•Much more interventions areneed toensure
more female -founded startups raise capital to
scale asonly9%oftheinvestment raised went to
female -founded startups whiles 91%offunding
wasraised bymale-founded companies .
•Interms ofthedealcount, 65%ofthefinancing
deals were raised bymale-founded startups whiles
35%were byfemale -founded startups .
*Female -founded = startup with at least one female co -founderFemale -founded startups are still largely underfunded, raising 9% of the total 
funding  
Male -founded
91%
Male -founded
65%Female -founded
35%
Deal value by gender Deal count by genderFemale -founded, 9%
14Foreign -educated founders received the most funding.Founder’s Education Background
Source: Gold Rush Database (2022)Foreign -
educated
66%Local -
educated
34%Deal value by education background
(January –June 2022, in %)
Local universities attended by funded founders
Foreign universities attended by funded founders
1570% of the investment raised was from venture capital companies.Investor Insights
Deal count by investor type
(January –June 2022, in %)
Source: Gold Rush Database (2022)Accelerator
35%
Development finance 
instituition
10%Private Equity
15%Venture Capital
40%Accelerator
1%
Development 
finance 
instituition
8%
Private Equity
21%Venture Capital
70%Deal value by investor type
(January –June 2022, in %)
Which investors financed the biggest deals?  
16mPharma’s $35 million Series D round represents the top deal for the half -year 
2022.T op Investment Deals 
Source: Gold Rush Database (2022)
Venture round
6%
Seed
29%
Pre-Series A
9%Series A
22%Pre-series B
5%Series B
11%Series D
19%Investments by stage
(January –June 2022, in %)
The biggest deals
(January –June 2022, in USD)
17*Venture round indicates an undisclosed stage of 
funding; however, the money came from a VC 
firm.Due to the limited financing sources, competitions and incubators serve as alternative 
sources of funding for early -stage companiesAlternative Funding
Source: iBlitz Database (2022)
18T o tackle the challenge of access to capital for founders, few interventions have 
been initiated by investors and ecosystem players. New Investment Vehicles
Source: iBlitz Database (2022)
Company T ype Fund size Sector of interest About
Venture Capital $20million•Basic Needs, i.e.,education,
healthcare, inclusive financial
services andagriculture
•Industrial, i.e.,industrial services,
light manufacturing and food
processingFirst private pensions -backed venture capital fund.
Investors include Petra Pension, Ghana Education
Service Occupational Pension, Axis Pension Trust,
Enterprise Pension and Stanbic Investment
Management Service clients .
Angel
SyndicateN/A•Sustainable, green andclimate -
focused SMEsCollective investment from angel investors and
business professionals inGhana andtheDiaspora
Venture Studio N/A •Sector AgnosticTheventure studio partners with cofounders after
validating thebusiness ideas andmodels .Also, invest
$15k-$25kinstartups attheMVP stage with
traction
VC-backed
acceleratorN/A •FintechInvests upto$20kinfunding for5-10%inearly-
stage ventures with traction, atech MVP , andtwo
fulltime founders
Intermediary N/A •AgribusinessMatches agribusiness companies raising $200kand
above toagri-focused investors
Intermediary N/A •Sector AgnosticAdigital matchmaking platform that connects
impact funds and angel investors with viable
businesses
Table of Content
20
Exits in a startup ecosystem act as a metric to measure the performance of the 
local startup scene.  The ecosystem has started witnessing a few acquisitions.  Mergers & Acquisitions
Source: Gold Rush Database (2022)
Comment
•Startup exits areimportant
foranecosystem since it
provides liquidity to
investors whotook abeton
thefounders
•Exits creates inspiration and
“fear ofmissing out” for
both aspiring entrepreneurs
andlocal investors .
•Inmost cases, thefounders
andmajor stakeholders of
the startup that exited
become angel investors that
invest the money they
earned through the exit
back tothestartup scene .
21Table of Content
22
Name Miishe Addy Meghan McCormick Peace Hyde Vanessa Leonie Mensah
Title CEO CEO CEO CEO
About Jetstream provides global logistics
services forAfrican businessesOZE digitizes small businesses
transactions andprovide them with
access toaffordable capitalMahogany Studios isaglobal
content development, sales and
marketing platform forAfrican
contentVDL facilitates continental trade
through sustainable, innovative, and
reliable logistical systems
Amount raised Undisclosed $3million Undisclosed Undisclosed
Stage Debt Pre-Series A Seed Angel round
Lead investorFour female founders raised capital from both venture capital and angel investors 
within the first half of the year. Spotlight: Female Founders
Source: Gold Rush Database (2022)
23Table of Content
24
Several startups made it into tier -one global accelerators such as Y -combinator and 
T echstars. 
International AcceleratorsScale Up: Startups Accepted Into International Accelerators
Source: iBlitz Database (2022)
Accelerator Year est. Industry Startup
2020
2021
20212021
25 HRtech Fintech
 Logistics
 Social commerce Healthtech
 Agtech
 Edtech
Several startups made it global accelerators such as Startup Wise Guys and 
Harvard Alumni Entrepreneurs.
International Accelerators
Accelerator Year est. IndustryScale Up: Startups Accepted Into International Accelerators
Source: iBlitz Database (2022)
Startup
2020
2018
2020
2020
2020
26 HRtech Fintech
 Logistics
 Social commerce Healthtech
 Agtech
 Edtech
Several startups were accepted into various Pan -African accelerators (1/2)
Pan-African AcceleratorsScale Up: Startups Accepted Into Pan -African Accelerators
Source: iBlitz Database (2022)
Accelerator Year est. Industry Startup
2017
2016
2013
2017
2021
HRtech Fintech
 Logistics
 Social commerce Healthtech
 Agtech
 Edtech
 27Pan-African Accelerators
Accelerator Year est. IndustryScale Up: Startups Accepted Into Pan -African Accelerators
Source: iBlitz Database (2022)
Year est.
2019
2020
2015
2020
28Several startups were accepted into various Pan -African accelerators (2/2)
HRtech Fintech
 Logistics
 Social commerce Healthtech
 Agtech
 Edtech
Local AcceleratorScale Up: Startups Accepted Into Local Accelerators
Key ecosystem actors like development agencies and banks continue to partner 
to provide holistic support for founders.
Comment
•Theecosystem witnessed some strategic
partnerships geared towards nurturing
thegrowth ofstartups inGhana .
•TheNextGen Ghana Fintech Accelerator
wasformed byGIZ/Make -ITinAfrica, the
German development agency which area
key development partner of the
ecosystem, Stanbic Bank Ghana, aleading
innovative commercial bank andGrowth
Africa, aleading Pan-African ESO.
•The accelerator assists growth stage
technology companies intheir market
validation and customer acquisition
phase .
•Fortheinaugural cohort, sixteen startups
were selected .Some ofthestartups have
subsequently been accepted into
international programs .Recently, Motito ,
the buy-now-pay-later fintech was
selected fortheSweden -based Norrksen
Impact accelerator .
Source: Stanbic Bank (2022)29Local AcceleratorScale Up: Startups Accepted Into Local Accelerators
Key partnerships like the Innolab Accelerator programme supported insurtech
startups develop and scale market -ready solutions.
Comment
•Another ofsuch strategic collaborations
that waswitnessed intheecosystem is
theInnolab Accelerator Programme .
•TheNational Insurance Commission (the
insurance regulator) inpartnership with
FSD Africa, andGIZ GmbH supported
insurtech start-upstogrow, andunlock
innovations totransform thecountry’s
insurance industry .
•The 10-week programme provided ten
startups withtheexpertise, resources, and
support todevelop and scale market -
ready solutions that bring social or
commercial value toGhana’s insurance
sector .
•BeNew Insurance, IBISA Network and
Figtech Ltdwere adjudged asthewinners
fortheDemo Day.Thewinners secured
€20,000 each inaddition toaccess to
expertise, business advisory support,
technology platform support and
mentorship .
Partners
Demo day winners
Source: GIZ Ghana (2022)30Local AcceleratorScale Up: Startups Accepted Into Local Accelerators
Corporations like T otal Energies have started interventions to support 
innovative business ideas with a positive impact on society. 
Comment
•The annual T otal Energies Startupper Challenge saw two 
student entrepreneurs, Adriana Appiagyei Nsiah Nimo
and Mathias Charles Yabe, declared as part of the three 
winners.
•Ms.Nimo’s Reecoplast leverages technology totrap
plastic waste floating onthesurface ofwater bodies
which ismelted andmixed with anappreciable amount
ofsand, then moulded into bricks forbuilding .d
•AkoFresh offers agreen preservation solution to
smallholder farmers and traders tohelp reduce
postharvest losses byproviding solar-powered cold
storage thatextends theshelf lifeofperishable crops
from the usual 5-day period to 21 days.
•Farmio leverages precision farming techniques to
provide end-to-endfarming solutions inacontrolled
environment forfarmers, making farming possible all
yearround, andproviding access toguaranteed markets .
Source: Total Energies (2022)31T o increase the addressable market, Ghana -based startups are expanding within 
the sub -region and other continents.Scale -ups: Cross Border Expansion
Source: iBlitz database (2022), Disrupt Africa (2022), Muse Africa (2022)
Comment
•Four startups ( Waya Money, Cadana , T endo and Boxconn ) pitched camps in the Nigeria market. Nigeria is the next logical step for Ghana -based startups.
•One of the leading live streaming and subscriber video on demand, Wi -flix also crossed the 1 million paid subscriber milestone .EthiopiaEthiopia
NigeriaNigeria BotswanaBotswanaEgyptEgypt
LiberiaLiberiaSenegalSenegal
BarbadosBarbados
ZambiaZambia
32Table of Content
33
Ghanaian universities and research institutions continue to be the bastion of 
knowledge and innovation.Public Sector: Universities as Innovation Hubs
Source: University of Ghana (2022), KNUST (2022), Ghana Business News (2022), Ashesi University (2022), Ghana News Agency (20 22)
IDEASUCCESS
Lorem ipsum dolor sit 
amet, consetur adipin 
nnscing elit
Lorem ipsum dolor sit 
amet, consetur adipin 
nnscing elit
Lorem ipsum dolor sit 
amet, consetur adipin 
nnscing elit
Comment
•As global challenges persist, practical 
scientific applications toward mitigation have 
become central to research in various 
universities. nnnnnnnn
•Developments inagriculture portend wellfor
reversing scarcity inthefood sector .The
Department ofAgro Enterprise Development
ofHoT echnical University developed anew
specie ofbaobab with ashorter gestation
period of27months .The Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research -Savanna
Agricultural Research Institute introduced a
new irrigation farming method tomaximise
water use and improve rice yield.
•The College ofEngineering ofKwame
Nkrumah University of Science and
T echnology wonaCAD 1mgrant toestablish
amultidisciplinary AIlabtotrain talent in
datascience andmachine learning .
34New policies are coming into place that will significantly affect the startup 
ecosystem.Public Sector: Policy Reform
Source: UNCDF (2022), Ghana Startup Bill (2022)
Tofoster innovation andcreate aconducive environment, theSecurities
andExchange Commission (SEC) shared with keystakeholders thefirst
equity crowdfunding policy guidelines ofitskind.InApril 2022.
Subsequently, thecommission engaged stakeholders todeliberate onthe
draft crowdfunding policy .
The engagement culminated inaworkshop hosted byUNCDF and
attended byhigh-level representatives from SECandseveral stakeholders
such asGrow ForMe,Paystack andtheInternational Trade Centre .
Discussions andengagement with crowdfunding providers oncritical
issues that affect thesector were held.The workshop ended with
recommendations that willbeaddressed inthepolicy revision and
finalization .Thestartup bill,intended tosetupaframework forthecreation and
development ofstart-upsandtopromote creativity andinnovation, is
stillinitsvalidation phase .Forinstance, inMay2022,withthesupport of
The Netherlands Development Organisation (SNV), through its
Boosting Green Employment andEnterprise Opportunities inGhana
(GrEEn )Project, organised avalidation workshop forbusinesses inthe
Ashanti Region onthe Ghana Start-Up and Innovation Bill.
Subsequently, thecoordinating team ofthebillorganized avalidation
workshop with fintech companies
These workshops seek inputs from start-upcompanies andstakeholders
onthe proposed billbefore submitting ittothe Ministry of
Communications andDigitalisation .Crowdfunding Policy Ghana Startup Bill
Sponsoring 
institution
Sponsoring 
institution
35Table of Content
36
Some growth -stage fintech companies poached top executives of commercial banks. Talent on The Move
Source: iBlitz Database (2022)
Comment
T wo interesting talent moves arethepoaching oftopexecutives
from commercial banks bytwogrowth -stage fintech .Surprisingly,
both fintech companies poached the talent from Standard
Chartered Bank Ghana .The ex.Head ofT echnology and
Operations, Patrick George assumed therole oftheChief
Transformation Officer atDream Oval.The bank's Chief
Information Officer joined theinclusive -fintech company, Letshego ,
astheHead ofNew Ventures .Astheecosystem matures, itwillnot
be far-fetch to see a lot of such moves .
Furthermore, Microsoft appointed theformer IBMRegional Head
ofAfrica, Angela Kyerematen -Jimoh ,asitsStrategic Partnership
Lead forAfrica foritsnew Africa Transformation Office .
Also, theAfrica -focused private equity firmCardinalStone Capital
Advisers appointed Shirley Somuah asaPartner tostrengthen its
presence in Ghana with anew office in Accra .
Finally, theexperienced startup operator GadOcran assumed the
Country Manager roleoftheNigerian mobility tech startup MAX
Africa asitexpanded into Ghana .Gad's rich portfolio includes
leading growth atstartups such asCadana ,mPharama ,and
corporates such astheMultimedia Group .
37Table of Content
38
Founders of Ghanaian descent are making waves in countries such as the United 
States of America.Diaspora Moves
Source: iBlitz Database (2022)
Comment
Theexploits ofthree individuals ofGhanaian descent
caught our attention .Daniel Acheampong’s Visible
Hands (VH), apre-seed venture capital fund, closed a
$10.5mfundtoinvest indiverse founders .VHinvests in
thetalent andthepeople themselves over ideas and
provides holistic, comprehensive support towomen
andpeople ofcolour founders tolaunch .
DrSetor Zilevu ,theworld’s youngest Ghanaian who
received aUser Experience PhD at26years, was
recognized ontheMITtechnology Innovators under 35
list.Setor graduated from Virginia T ech with aPhD in
Computer Science, where hefocused onHuman -
Computer Interaction forComplex Machine Learning .
Inspired bysobolo (hibiscus drink), tech veteran Paul
Owusu launched acanned cocktail line,Phreshly ,inthe
USA.Before thenewventure, Paulmoved toGhana in
2017 toestablish Sika, apeer-to-peer payments and
remittance platform, andLogique ,atech accelerator
andparent company, totech products such asStack,
SmartLobby ,andCoast .
39Table of Content
Akofresh is a fast -growing Agtech startup solving the menace of post -harvest losses. Spotlight: Akofresh -Cold Storage For Fruit & Vegetable Value Chain
Source: iBlitz interviews with Founder (2022)
1122 33 44 55 66 77 88
Incorporated
(2021)Community Prize Winner 
T echstyle for Social Good 
International Competition
(2021)
Grand Prize Winner
Fishbowl Entrepreneurship 
Challenge
(2021)Winner & T op Innovator
Generation Restoration Y outh 
Challenge
(2021)
Winner
Y outh for Climate Resilient 
Agriculture Competition
(2022)First Prize Winner
Y oung Global Changers Recoupling 
Award Global Solutions Initiative 
(2022)
Best Startup Under 3 Years Old 
Ghana Startupper of the Year 
Challenge 
(2022)Grand Winner 
Pan-African Under 3 Years 
Startupper Challenge
(2022)
Mathias Charles Yabe
Co-Founder, CEO
41Spotlight: Akofresh -Cold Storage For Fruit & Vegetable Value Chain
Source: iBlitz interviews with Founder (2022)Innovation Spark (IS):Kindly introduce yourself inanutshell
Mathias Yabe (MY) :Iamayoung person passionate about technology,
design, community sustainability and solving problems facing our
environment .Igrew upinAboabo ,asmall village intheeastern partof
Ghana .Inthiscommunity, Iwitnessed many people facing theissue of
food insecurity andfinancial instability .T oday, Iamafood systems hero
andatechnology enthusiast, working tomake food systems stronger,
fairer and more sustainable inlocal communities inGhana .
IS:How does your product/service work -how doyou make
money?
MY:AkoFresh ,isagreen cold chain enterprise thatoffers smallholder
farmers effective preservation services andamobile application that
connects farmers tofood aggregators tohelp reduce post-harvest
losses .Themission ofAkoFresh istohelpreduce post-harvest losses of
fruits andvegetables .
Theinnovation isasolar-powered coldstorage preservation technology
thatextends theshelf lifeofperishable crops from 5daysto21days.This
off-gridcoldstore isavailable tosmallholder farmers asaservice where
farmers payadaily feeper20kgcrate stored orweekly subscription fees.
While farmers keep their crops, AkoFresh further assists farmers in
selling offtheir crops atcompetitive prices .IS:What sparked your start?
MY:Mymotivation came from avolunteer triptotheAkumadan
community in2018.“Ileftallmytomatoes onmyfarm torotsince my
buyers couldn’t make itontime.T omato farming ismyonly source of
livelihood tofendformyself andmyfamily” .These arethewords ofa56-
year-oldwoman ImetintheAkumadan community during avolunteer
tripwithmyEnactus team in2018.
Asayoung innovator whogrew upinafarming village, herstory inspired
metocreate asolution tomitigate theissue ofpost-harvest losses in
Ghana .That wasthebeginning ofmyjourney asafood systems hero.
IS:What areyoumost proud of?
MY:Asyoung asIamandacollege student, being able tocreate a
solution thatishelping anentire community offarmers store perishable
crops toreduce postharvest losses, improve thelivelihood ofrural
farmers andcreate decent jobopportunities forwomen issomething I
ammost proud of.
IS:What innovative aspect makes your business different inone
word?
MY:Inclusiveness .
42Spotlight: Akofresh -Cold Storage For Fruit & Vegetable Value Chain
IS:What would youdodifferently ifyouwere tostart allover again?
MY:Thinking Bigger!! Ibelieve thatmany things wewant inourlives willcome tousif
wepermit ourselves toreceive them .Y oucanagree with methatthere arethings you
have been able toachieve presently that you only dreamt ofsome years ago.
IS:What advice would you give toothers who want tostart abusiness in
Ghana?
MY:Make sure you're passionate about what youwant todo.Starting abusiness,
especially inourpart oftheworld, isnoteasy, somake sure you're fully committed
through theupsanddowns .Time management isalsoessential when starting abusiness .
Asayoung entrepreneur, youmay stillbeattheuniversity .Get into thehabit of
maintaining adiary andensure youcancomplete tasks andattend meetings promptly .
Don't beafraid toaskquestions ortosayyoudon't know theanswer butwillcome back
shortly with one.People willrespect your willingness tolearn, your curiosity andyour
openness .
IS:Which challenge hasbeen your greatest?
MY:Thelackofaccess toreliable electricity .While cooling isthemost effective wayto
slow down thespoilage rate, there isamore profound challenge indeploying cold
storage technologies inrural communities since most ofthese communities arestillnot
connected tothegrid.Tohelp achieve 100%energy access andensure inclusive food
systems, wedecided tooperate ourcoldroom technology fullypowered bysolar energy .
Funding :The cost ofdeploying 100%solar-powered cold rooms isprohibitive and
requires highupfront costs tosetup.Getting funding opportunities, especially inGhana,
hasbeen achallenge ..
Source: iBlitz interview with Founder (2022)43
Ako Fresh storage unitAbout The Innovation Spark
We are enablers in the African start -up ecosystem. We fuel growth through 
innovation, media exposure andadvisory
STRATEGY & 
INSIGHTS
VALUE CHAIN 
DESIGN
MEDIA
MANAGEMENT 
SUPPORT•Strategic consulting for entrepreneurs, SMEs and corporates
•Program management and curriculum design for entrepreneurship workshops, incubators 
and accelerator programs
•Sector agnostic deep -dive research and market entry
•Forging partnerships across various verticals and geographies for investors, businesses, 
international development agencies and policy makers
•Supporting individuals to ideation to implementation of new concepts
•Forming bridges between investors, accelerators and entrepreneurs
•Creating reports and weekly insights about the latest in the innovation ecosystem
•Hosting interviews and shows with leading and emerging talents and leaders
•Investing and advising media agencies, content creators and animators
•Business development support for various corporates and specific projects
•Advisory on both internal and external matters of various ventures
•End to end support on various projects and programs
44Isaac Newton 
Acquah
Strategy Consultant
Dominica Amanfo
Content ConsultantKojo Ahiakpa
Agribusiness Consultant
Christian Kusi
Technology ConsultantRobert Obiri
Communication ConsultantMeet The Innovation Spark T eam
The Innovation Spark team is a collective of consultants with vast experience 
and professional expertise
TheInnovation Spark wasformed in2018 with thespirit tospark
ideas andinnovative processes andbepartofimplementing change in
theAfrican entrepreneurship space .TheInnovation Spark hasgrown
from 3co-founders toatalented team that includes theformer
Interim Chief Executive Officer ofthe Federation ofAssociations of
Ghanaian Exporters (FAGE), theformer Head ofMarketing ofBlueCrest
University ,theCommunity Manager ofWikimedia Foundation Ghana,
most sought -after STEM instructors, serial entrepreneurs andtalent
of leading media shows .
Several thousand have been informed andeducated with media
reports onvarious channels .TheInnovation Spark hasimpacted 100s
offounders directly through ourwork inseveral programs, including
GIZ, UNFPA, CEIBS, Ghana Innovation Hub, IoTNetwork Hub,andvarious
universities .Dozen more have benefited from country &sector -
focused market research projects and third-party commissioned
reports thathave informed companies entering intothemarket and
venture capital looking for great deals.
Moving forward, theteam, with ourvarious partners, seeks tochange
thelandscape inmedia, consulting, andventure building .Ammishaddai Ofori
Innovation Consultant
Onyeka Ekeh
Marketing Consultant
Who we are 
Richard Joseph
Digital Economy Consultant
Ghana Innovation Journal Half Year Report
Researched by: The Innovation Spark
Written by: The Innovation Spark
Designed by: The Innovation Spark
Open to:  Market Research  | Commissioned Reports | Visualization of Data Sets | Training Programs | Business Linkages | Media & Design Supportwww.theinnovationspark.com  | reports@theinnovationspark.com | Social Handle: @theinnovationspark   | Social media pages:    
