

Extracted from: 2020 SGGH ANNUAL REPORT.pdf
VISIT
GO ONLINE
societegenerale.com.ghFind out more:
2020 ANNUAL 
REPORT AND 
FINANCIAL 
STATEMENTS2020  Major Events
WE INTRODUCED  INNOVATIONS
WE LAUNCHED  NEW SERVICES
Easily pay your customs duty
at any SG Ghana branchPay for all government services
and taxes at any SG Ghana branchOur all new innovation lab
2020  Major Events
WE LAUNCHED  EXCITING COMMERCIAL PROMOTIONS & CAMPAIGNS
WE OPENED 
MORE OUTLETS
Loans Promotion Cards Promotion
Airport City Branch Derby Avenue Branch Lapaz Branch
àƺǝǣƬǼƺˡȇƏȇƬǣȇǕȒǔǔƺȸǔȒȸȒɖȸƬɖɀɎȒȅƺȸɀ
in collaboration with CFAO Motors
 Overview
 2 Our purpose and values in the service of our clients 
 4 Notice and Agenda for Annual General Meeting
 Corporate Governance
 5 Corporate information
 6	 Profile	of	the	board	of	directors
 9 Key management personnel
 Strategic Report
 12 Board chair’s statement
 14 Managing Directors Review
 Financial Statements
 18 Report of the Directors
 28 Corporate structure
 33	 Statement	of	Directors	Responsibilities
 34 Independent Report of the Auditors
 38 Financial highlights
 40	 Statement	of	profit	or	loss	and	other	comprehensive	income
 41	 Statement	of	financial	position
 42 Statement of changes in equity
 43	 Statement	of	cash	ﬂows
 44	 Notes	to	financial	statement
 99 Proxy Form
 100 Resolutions
 102 Branch networkTABLE OF CONTENTS
1
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCOUR PURPOSE 
Building	 together	 with	our	clients,	a	better	and	sustainable	
future	through	responsible	and	innovative	financial	solutions.
OUR MISSION STATEMENT 
The	Bank’s	mission	is	to	create	the	preferred	 banking	 institution,	
which	employs	 team	spirit,	innovation,	 responsibility	 &	
commitment	 to	provide	quality	products	 and	services	 that	best	
satisfy	the	needs	of	our	customers.
OUR VALUES: TEAM SPIRIT , INNOVATION, RESPONSIBILITY & 
COMMITMENT
Team Spirit:	 is	characterised	 by	a	sense	of	service	which	
is intended to make  Societe Generale Ghana the leading 
customer	 relationship	 bank	and	making	listening	 to	customers	
and all other stakeholders, information sharing and solidarity 
as well as cooperation and internal pooling of resources its 
main	priority.	
 
Innovation: which is providing added value and greater 
simplification	 to	serve	clients	with	a	framework	 that	takes	into	
account	reputational	risk.
 
Responsibility: that consists of taking decisions quickly 
to meet the needs of clients and the organisation without 
sacrificing	 their	long-term	 objectives.	 It	also	involves	 having	the	
courage	 both	individually	 and	collectively	 to	take	responsibility	
for	actions	 and	decisions	 and	finally	attaching	 as	much	
importance to results as well as consequences of decisions for 
all	stakeholders.
Commitment:	 which	makes	it	possible	 to	make	a	difference	
and	to	contribute	 to	the	success	of	clients	and	the	Bank	thereby	
resulting	in	a	high	level	of	service	and	performance.
OUR  PURPOSE
Helping our clients build the future
We	reaffirm	 the	importance	 of	our	role	as	bankers	 which	is	
to	help	our	clients	invest	in	a	more	sustainable	 future.	By	
supporting	 their	projects	 and	helping	them	grow,	we	are	firmly	
committed	to	those	who	move	the	world	forward.
A trusted partner
Societe Generale Ghana puts value creation for its customers 
at	the	heart	of	its	business	 model,	placing	 itself	alongside	
entrepreneurs	 growing	 their	businesses	 and	developing	 their	
projects.	 The	Bank	offers	added	value	in	every	aspect	of	its	
business	and	in	each	of	its	business	lines:
 ymaking	 life	easier	for	our	customers:	 assisting	 our	
customers	 by	providing	 them	with	the	right	service	at	the	
right	time,	combining	 the	best	that	humans	 and	digital		
technology	have	to	offer;
 yadvising:	 putting	 our	expertise	 to	work	for	all	customer	segments	 by	tailoring	 our	support	 to	the	issues	facing	each	
one	of	them;
 yconnecting	 people	and	businesses:	 creating	 a	link	between	
those	who	have	projects	and	those	who	can	help	them;
 yusing	our	resources	 responsibly:	 putting	our	balance	 sheet	
to	work	to	help	those	who	want	to	invest;
 yevaluating	 and	managing	 risks:	managing	 risks	in	 	a	
rigorous	and	responsible	manner	over	the	long	term;
 ysafeguarding	 interests:	 undertaking	 a	commitment	 to	
respect and protect everyone’s interests while aiming for 
the	highest	standards	of	security	and	quality	of	service.
 
Customer satisfaction: A priority
Customer satisfaction is regularly measured and has increased 
or	remained	 steady	at	a	high	level	in	all	our	business	 lines.	The	
Bank has adopted a structured approach to monitor customer 
satisfaction	 using	a	range	of	tools:	opinion	 surveys,	 surprise	
visits,	questionnaires	 and	net	promoter	 score	ratings.	 A	
formalized	 process	to	address	 complaints	 by	our	quality	team	is	
in	place	with	the	protection	 of	our	clients	being	at	the	forefront	
of	all	our	operations.	 We	are	committed	 to	safeguarding	 their	
interests, particularly in light of the growing risks associated 
with	cybercrime.
Corporate culture and ethics
For	Societe	Generale	Ghana	instilling	a	culture	of	responsibility	
based	on	strong	values,	notably	 through	 our	Code	of	Conduct,	
means	 observing	 the	highest	 standards	 of	integrity	 and	
behaviour	 in	all	business	 lines	and	countries	 where	we	operate.	
The	Bank	has	established	 ethical	principles	 and	ensures	 that	
all	our	staff	comply	 with	them.	As	a	responsible	 employer,	
we are committed to ensuring the respect of human rights 
and implement appropriate measures in instances where our 
principles	are	not	adhered	to.
Expertise and skills
The Bank pays particular attention to the quality of our 
dialogue	 with	staff	representative	 bodies,	 especially	 with	
respect	to	addressing	 the	challenges	 of	changing	 business	 and	
employment	 trends.	Anticipating	 the	Bank’s	business	 needs,	
hiring	and	helping	 our	staff	develop	 their	careers,	 particularly	
through	 training	 and	internal	 professional	 mobility	 and	
promotions, are essential for attracting and retaining talent 
and	strengthening	staff	loyalty.
 
Diversity and inclusion
Building	 a	company	 that	is	inclusive	 and	reﬂects	the	diversity	
of	its	customers	 is	one	of	the	Bank’s	key	ambitions.	 Above	
and	beyond	 regulatory	 obligations,	 Societe	 Generale	 treats	
diversity and inclusion for all as strategic issues for today and 
tomorrow,	and	takes	proactive	steps	in	this	regard.OUR PURPOSE AND VALUES IN 
THE SERVICE OF OUR CLIENTS
2
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCPerformance and compensation
To attract and retain talents, Societe Generale Ghana 
implements an attractive and fair pay policy, which recognizes 
each	staff	member’s	 contribution	 to	the	Bank’s	performance	
while	ensuring	the	appropriate	management	of	risks.Health and safety
Societe Generale Ghana is committed to developing a respectful 
and	safe	working	 environment	 to	enable	every	one	of	its	staff	
members	 to	work	in	conditions	 that	are	positive	 for	their	health	
and	well-being,	 in	particular	 by	promoting	 the	appropriate	
work-life	balance.
3
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT the 41st Annual General Meeting (“AGM”) of the Shareholders of Societe Generale Ghana PLC (“the 
Company”)	 will	be	held	VIRTUALLY	 and	streamed	 live	on	https://sgghanaagm.com	 from	the	Head	Office	of	Societe	Generale	 Ghana	
PLC	on	Thursday	30	September		2021		at	11:00am	to	transact	the	following	business:	-
ORDINARY	BUSINESS:	ORDINARY	RESOLUTIONS
1.	 To receive and adopt the Financial Statements of the Company (together with the reports of the directors and the auditors of 
the	Company)	for	the	year	ended	31	December	2020.
2.	To	re-elect	a	Director;	 the	following	 director	 retiring	by	rotation	 pursuant	 to	Section	88(1)	of	the	Company’s	 Constitution	 who	
being	eligible,	offers	herself	for	re-election
 yMrs Laurette Otchere
3.	 To	elect	a	director;	the	following	director	appointed	during	the	year	and	retiring	in	accordance	with	section	72(1)	of	the	
Companies Constitution
 yFrancis	Awua-Kyerematen
 
4.	 To	approve	Directors’	fees
5.	 To	authorize	the	Directors	to	determine	the	remuneration	of	the	Auditors
Dated,	this	24	day	of	March		2021.
.................................................................
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD
ANGELA	NANANSAA	BONSU
THE SECRETARY
+233	302214314
sgghana.info@socgen.com
www.societegenerale.ghana.gh
@societegenerale.ghana
Societe Generale Ghana
@SG_GhanaNOTICE OF VIRTUAL 
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING 
4
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCBOARD OF DIRECTORS
1.	Margaret	Boateng	Sekyere	 -		 Board	Chair	Independent	Non-Executive
2.	Hakim	Ouzzani	 -					 Managing	Director
3.	Laurette	Korkor	Otchere	 -				 Non-Executive	
4.	Agnes	Tauty	Giraldi	 -			 Non-Executive		
5.	Georges	Wega	 -				 Non-Executive		
6.	Arnaud	De	Gaudemaris	 -		 Non-Executive		
7.	Martine	Hitti	 -		 Independent	Non-Executive
8.	Fosuhene	Acheampong	 -			 Non-Executive
9.	Francis	Awua-Kyerematen	 -			 Independent	Non	Executive
COMPANY SECRETARY Angela Nanansaa Bonsu
 Societe Generale Ghana PLC
	 2nd	Crescent,	Royalt	Castle	Road	
 Ring Road Central
	 P.O.	Box	13119
 Accra, Ghana
REGISTERED OFFICE	2nd Crescent, Royalt Castle Road 
 Ring Road Central, Accra
	 P.O.	Box	13119
 Accra, Ghana
AUDITORS	 Ernst	&	Young	Chartered	Accountants
 No G 15 Building
 Airport Residential Area
 White Avenue
 Accra Ghana
 PO Box KA 16009
 Airport, Accra, Ghana
REGISTRARS NTHC Limited
 Martco House
	 P.O.	Box	KA	9563
 Airport, Accra
 Ghana
COUNTRY OF INCORPORATION Ghana, Accra
HOLDING COMPANY SG Financial Services, Holding Company
UL TIMATE HOLDING COMPANY Societe Generale incorporated in FranceCORPORATE INFORMATION
5
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCPROFILE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MARGARET BOATENG SEKYERE (Chairperson)
HAKIM OUZZANI  (Managing Director)   
MARTINE HITTI  (Member) FRANCIS AWUA-KYEREMATEN  (Member)
GEORGES WEGA  (Member) LAURETTE OTCHERE  (Member) AGNES TAUTY GIRALDI  (Member)
ARNAUD DE GAUDESMARIS  (Member) FOSUHENE ACHEAMPONG  (Member)
ANGELA NANANSAA BONSU  (Company Secretary)EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
INDEPENDENT NON-EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
NON-EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
BOARD SECRETARY
6
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCMargaret Boateng Sekyere: Board Chair.  She received a 
Bachelor’s degree in Accounting and an MBA from Howard 
University	 in	Washington	 D.C	in	1985	and	1987	respectively.	
From	1985	to	1989	she	was	in	Public	Accounting	 and	Mortgage	
Banking	 in	the	USA	after	which	she	joined	Price	Waterhouse	
in Ghana as a Management Consultant with special focus on 
Financial Management Reviews and Assessments of donor 
funding	 to	public	sector	institutions.	 With	over	30	years	of	
experience	 in	private	 and	public	sector	management,	 she	
was	instrumental	 in	the	development	 of	public	sector	reforms	
in	Sierra	Leone	in	the	early	1990s	and	in	Ghana	from	2004	to	
2007.		In	1993,	she	was	recruited	 by	the	Government	 of	Sierra	
Leone	to	manage	 a	5	year	Public	Sector	Program	 funded	by	
the	World	Bank.	She	served	as	a	Senior	Resource	 Management	
Officer	of	the	World	Bank	Office	in	Ghana	from	1998	to	2003.	
Whilst there, she managed the administrative services and 
accounting	 team	in	the	Country	 Office	including	 training,	
systematic	 back-up	 and	replacement	 planning.	 She	played	a	
key role in the coaching and development of newly recruited 
resource	 management	 staff	for	Country	 Offices	in	the	Africa	
Region	–	South	Africa,	Uganda,	 Zimbabwe,	 Malawi,	 Nigeria,	
Ethiopia	 and	Kenya.		 From	2007	to	2013,	she	joined	a	team	
to	set	up	an	Asset	Management	 Firm	–	OAK	Partners	 Ltd.,	-	
providing	 financing	 for	private	real	estate	projects	 in	Accra.	
During	the	period	of	2013-2018,	 she	was	an	Executive	 Director	
of	Finance	 and	Administration	 for	Belstar	Capital.	 At	Belstar,	
she also played a key role as a Licensed Investment Advisory 
Representative of the Securities and Exchange Commission, 
responsible	 for	compliance	 of	financial	 regulatory	 matters.		 She	
was	nominated	 to	the	Board	of	Directors	 on	12	July	2019	with	
Bank	of	Ghana	granting	 approval	 on	20	November	 2019.	Bank	
of Ghana further approved her appointment as Board Chair on 
15	September	2020.
Hakim Ouzzani: Managing Director.  He holds a Bachelor 
of Arts degree in Economics and a Master of Arts degree in 
Organisation Sociology from the Ecole Nationale Superieure d’ 
Administration et de Gestation National School of Management 
and	Administration.		 He	also	holds	a	Diploma	 in	Banking	 and	
Finance	 from	the	Institute	 of	Development	 Finance	 Tunis.	
Mr Ouzzani has a Diploma of Higher Education from the 
Arab	Maghred	 Development	 Financing	 Institute.	 Before	his	
appointment as Managing Director, he was a Senior Executive 
Regional Manager with Societe Generale International Banking 
Financial Services in charge of Cameroun, Chad, Congo 
Brazaville,	 Equatorial	 Guinea,	 Ghana	and	Guinea	 Conakry.	
In	1998,	he	was	the	New	Products	 Development	 Manager	 at	
the	Union	Bank.		He	has	worked	 as	a	Professor	 at	the	Ecole	
Superieure	 de	Banque.			 He	also	worked	with	the	Central	Bank	
of	Algerie	as	a	Senior	Officer	Loans	&	Refinancing	 Direction	
and	Licencing	 &	Regulatory	 Function.	 From	2000	to	2002,	he	
managed	 the	Corporate	 Branch	of	the	Union	Bank	Brokerage	
From	2012	to	2016,	he	was	the	CEO	of	Societe	Generale	 Chad.		
He also held various positions within the Societe Generale as 
Group Deputy General Manager SG Algerie, Network and Sales 
Manager SG Algerie and Network Development Manager SG 
Algerie.		 Mr	Ouzzani	 was	nominated	 to	the	Board	of	Directors	
of	Societe	Generale	 Ghana	on	16	November	 2016	with	the	Bank	
of	Ghana	granting	 approval	 to	the	said	appointment	 on	23	
January	2017.Laurette Korkor Otchere:  Non Executive Director. She is a 
Barrister at Law and a Deputy Director General Operations and 
Benefits	 at	Social	Security	 and	National	 Insurance	 Trust.		She	
holds	a	Juris	Doctor;	a	Bachelor	 of	Arts	in	Economics	 and	is	a	
Certified	 Professional	 in	Human	Resources	 (SHRM-CP).		 She	is	
a	member	 of	the	Ghana	Bar,	State	of	New	Jersey	Bar	and	the	
United	States	District	Court,	District	of	New	Jersey.		 She	is	an	
Adjunct	 Professor	 at	Rutgers	University	 School	of	Management	
and	Labour	Relations	 and	the	Society	 for	Human	 Resource	
Management.	 	 She	has	extensive	 working	 and	professional	
experience	 internationally	 and	locally.		She	joined	the	Board	of	
Directors	 in	July	2017	with	Bank	of	Ghana	granting	 approval	 on	
6	September	2017.
Agnes Tauty Giraldi:  Non Executive Director. She is the Head 
of Export Finance Africa, Europe and Structured Trade Finance, 
Societe	Generale	 Corporate	 and	Investment	 Banking.		 She	has	
over	23	years’	experience	 in	the	Corporate	 Investment	 Banking	
sector with an extensive experience of Structured Trade and 
Export	Finance.	 She	has	solid	experience	 in	emerging	 markets	
and	has	led	several	deals	involving	 sovereign,	 sub-sovereign,	
public	and	private	corporates.	 She	is	currently	 the	Head	of	
Export Finance Africa, Europe and Structured Trade Finance, 
Societe	 Generale	 Paris.	Within	the	Societe	 Generale	 Group,	
she	has	held	the	following	 positions;	 Deputy	Head	Origination	
Export Finance, Head of European Origination Export Finance, 
Country Manager in the Europe and Central Asia Desk, 
Societe Generale Paris, Vice president Societe Generale Paris 
responsible	 	 for	the	execution	 of	the	documentation	 (Loan	
documentation,	 credit	insurance,	 securities,	 etc.),	Corporate	
Relationship Manager, Societe Generale London Relationship 
Manager	 SMEs,	French	Network,	 Societe	 Generale.			 She	was	
nominated	 to	the	Board	of	Directors	 on	11	April	2018	with	Bank	
of	Ghana	granting	approval	on	1	October	2018.
Georges K. T . Wega: Non Executive Director.  He holds a 
Bachelor of Science in Industrial Engineering and a Master of 
Science	 also	in	Industrial	 Engineering	 (General	 Management).		
His	career	spans	over	22	years	having	worked	 in	several	
capacities	 in	organizations	 around	 the	world.	He	worked	
primarily	 as	a	University	 Lecturer,	 then	for	Canada	 Post	
Corporation,	 General	 Electric,	 Barclays	 Bank	and	United	Bank	
for	Africa.	Within	the	Societe	 Generale	 Group,	he	has	also	
worked with SG Cameroon, SG Senegal and has served as the 
SG	Regional	 Director	 for	West	Africa.		He	was	nominated	 to	the	
Board	of	Directors	 on	22	November	 2018	with	Bank	of	Ghana	
granting	approval	on	16	August	2019.
Arnaud De Gaudemaris: Non Executive Director. He holds 
an	Engineering	 Degree	from	ISEP	Paris.	 	He	is	the	current	
Chief	of	Staff	to	the	Head	of	Societe	 Generale	 for	the	AFMO	
Region	managing	 about	14,000	staff.	 	He	is	responsible	 for	
the organization of strategy preparation meetings, internal 
management	 meetings	 and	also	the	African	Region	strategy.		
He	was	nominated	 to	the	Board	of	Directors	 on	28	November	
2018	with	Bank	of	Ghana	granting	approval	on	16	August	2019.Profile Of The Board Of Directors cont’d
7
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCMartine Hitti: Independent Non Executive Director.  She 
holds an Engineering Degree from the Ecole Nationale Superiere 
d’information	 pour	l’industrie	 et	l’entreprise	 in	France.		 She	
retired from the services of the Societe Generale Group in 
2014	and	currently	 works	as	a	consultant.		 Whilst	working	 with	
Societe	Generale,	 she	held	the	following	 positions;	 Director	 of	
Information	 Systems,	 Chief	Information	 Officer	International	
Retail Banking, IT Manager Cash Flows, Skills Development 
Manager, IT Securities Manager and IT Communications 
Manager.		 She	was	nominated	 to	the	Board	of	Directors	 on	12	
April	2019	with	Bank	of	Ghana	granting	 approval	 on	6	November	
2019.
Mr Fosuhene Acheampong: Non Executive Director. He is a 
chartered	 accountant	 by	profession	 and	holds	an	MBA	in	Finance	
from	the	Lagos	State	University	 and	a	Bsc	in	Accounting	 from	
the	University	 of	Lagos.		He	is	currently	 the	Director	 of	Finance	
and	Administration	 at	the	Cedar	Seal	Company	 Limited.		 From	
2001-2004,	 he	was	the	Audit	Manager	 at	Deloitte	 &	Touche	.	He	
was the Chief Internal Auditor  at the Minerals Commission from 
2004-2005	 and	went	on	to	become	 the	Director	 of	Finance	 from		
2005-2006.From	 2010	to	2016,	he	held	the	following	 positions	
in	the	Access	Bank	Group;	Head	Business	 Banking	 and	Regional	
Head	Western	 Region.	Before	the	name	change	to	Access	Bank,	
Mr Acheampong worked as Area Manager of Intercontinental 
Bank	for	the	Western	 and	Ashanti	 Regions	 from	2008	to	2010.	From	2010	to	2012,	he	was	the	Group	Head	Marketing	 Division	
Retail	of	Intercontinental	 Bank.	He	also	worked	with	the	Bank	
as	Head	of	Loan	Recovery.		 He	was	nominated	 to	the	Board	in	
April	2020	with	Bank	of	Ghana	granting	 approval	 of	the	said	
nomination	on	3	June	2020.
Mr Francis Awua-Kyerematen: Independent Non-Executive 
Director.		 He	is	a	Fellow	of	the	Association	 of	Chartered	 Certified	
Accountants.		 He	holds	a	Master	of	Business	 Administration	 from	
the	University	 of	Chicago	 Business	 School	and	a	Bachelor	 of	Arts	
Honours Degree in Accounting and Finance from the Middlesex 
University	 London	UK.		He	is	the	Principal	 Advisor	and	Managing	
Director	 for	Winchmore	 Capital.		 Mr	Awua-Kyerematen	 worked	
as	the	Country	 Director	 for	Citibank	 Ghana	from	2008	to	2016.	
Prior to moving to Ghana, he was with Citigroup in the London 
Office	responsible	 for	Debt	Capital	Markets	 –	Middle	East	&	
African	Desk	from	2005.		He	also	worked	as	a	Senior	Compliance	
Accountant	 for	HM	Revenue	 Customs	 in	the	UK	from	1998	to	
2003.		He	also	spent	a	year	with	Grant	Thornton	 Ipswich	 Office	
UK	as	a	Senior	Corporate	 Finance	 and	Recovery	 Associate	 from	
1997	to	1998.		Mr	Awua-Kyerematen	 was	nominated	 to	the	
Board	14	December	 2020	with	Bank	of	Ghana	granting	 approval	
to	the	said	nomination	on	23	February	2021.Profile Of The Board Of Directors cont’d
8
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCHakim Ouzzani: Managing Director. Please refer to the section 
under	Board	of	Directors.		
Francois Pousse: Deputy Managing Director.  He holds a 
Master of Science in Finance and Economics from the London 
School	of	Economics	 (UK)	and	from	Ecole	Nationale	 des	Ponts	
et	Chaussées	 (FR).	Prior	to	his	appointment	 in	SG	Ghana,	he	
worked	for	Inspection	 Generale	 at	Societe	Generale	 Head	Office	
in Paris for 9 years, where he performed and supervised audit 
and strategy consulting assignments for the top Management of 
the	Societe	Generale	 Group.	He	has	worked	in	various	fields	in	
the	banking	 sector	such	as	IT	transformation	 in	retail	banking,	
market	risk	on	equity	derivatives	 and	anti-money-laundering.	
Working	 in	diverse	business	 environments	 such	as	Southern	
France,	Hong-Kong,	 Burkina-Faso,	 the	UK	and	USA	has	added	
to	his	wealth	of	knowledge.		 He	eventually	 became	 one	of	the	
Managing directors at Inspection, with shared oversight over a 
team	of	120	people	made	up	of	Inspectors,	 data	scientists	 and	
support	 staff	directly	reporting	 to	Global	Head	of	Inspection.	 Mr	
Pousse	is	also	the	Treasurer	 of	the	Chamber	 of	Commerce	 and	
Industry	France	–	Ghana	(CCIFG).
Bernice Allotey: Chief Operating Officer. She holds an 
Executive Masters in Business Administration (Finance) and BSC 
in	Computer	 Science	 and	Statistics	 both	from	the	University	 of	
Ghana,	Legon.		 She	is	a	proven	Project/Programme	 Manager	
and	a	Lean	Six	Sigma	Green	belt	trained.	 With	over	24	years’	
experience	 in	the	Banking	 industry,	 she	has	built	strong	
expertise	 in	Project/Change	 Management,	 delivering	 and	
overseeing	 strategic	 projects	 that	cuts	across	all	the	various	
functions	 in	the	Bank.	She	has	also	worked	on	Project	Portfolio	
Management, Information System Management, Business 
Process	 Management	 and	Banking	 operations.	 Before	her	
appointment as the COO, she was the Head of Organization 
and	Projects	 in	Societe	Generale	 Ghana	from	2008	to	2018	and	
was	responsible	 for	the	implementation	 of	the	bank’s	Project	
Portfolio	 by	ensuring	 overall	alignment	 of	the	organizational	
structures	 to	the	business	 strategy.		 As	the	Chief	Operating	
Officer,	she	now	oversees	 the	following	 strategic	 departments;	
Organization	 and	Projects,	 Information	 Systems	 &	Technology,	
Information security, Operations, Logistics and Physical 
Security.
  
Angela N. Bonsu: Company Secretary General Manager.   
She holds a Master of Business Administration from the 
Middlesex	 University	 Business	 School,	London	 and	an	honours	
degree	in	Law	from	Birkbeck	 College,	 University	 of	London.		
She	is	a	professionally	 qualified	 member	 in	good	standing	
with	the	Institute	 of	Directors	 Ghana.		She	has	rich	professional	
experience in Company Secretaryship, Compliance, Corporate 
Governance,	 Business	 Integration,	 Global	Employee	 Share	
Ownership Programmes, Legal Administration, Human 
Resource,	 and	Project	 Management	 with	over	two	decades	
of	experience	 working	 in	various	capacities.	 As	the	Company	Secretary for a Bank listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange, Ms 
Bonsu	also	has	oversight	 responsibility	 for	Permanent	 Control,	
the	Legal	Department,	 Communications,	 Environmental	 &	
Social	Management	 Systems,	 Sustainable	 Development	 &	
Corporate	Social	Responsibility.		
Felix Adjaku: Chief Finance Officer. He is a Fellow of the 
Association	 of	Chartered	 Certified	 Accountants	 (ACCA)	UK	
and	holds	a	Bachelor	 degree	in	Sociology	 from	the	University	
of	Ghana.	 Felix	has	worked	 in	various	 departments	 of	the	
bank	namely	Corporate	 banking	 as	a	credit	analyst,	 Treasury	
department	 as	an	Asset	and	Liability	 Management	 officer	and	
as	a	branch	 officer	within	the	Retail	Banking	 department.	
Before	being	appointed	 the	Chief	Finance	 Officer	he	was	the	
Head	of	Financial	 Reporting	 and	performance	 measurement.	
Felix	has	11	years’	experience	in	banking.
Kwame Anterkyi: Chief Risk Officer in charge of Credit 
and Market Risk.  He is a graduate of the Kwame Nkrumah 
University	 of	Science	and	Technology	 Ghana	with	a	Bsc.	in	Civil	
Engineering and a Master of Business Administration (Finance 
Option)	 from	the	Ghana	Institute	 of	Management	 and	Public	
Administration	 (GIMPA).	 He	is	also	a	professionally	 qualified	
member	 of	the	Chartered	 Institute	 of	Bankers	 (Ghana).		 Kwame	
Anterkyi	 has	over	17	years	banking	 experience	 specializing	 in	
Corporate and Institutional Banking anchored on a strong 
credit	risk	analysis	 background	 having	worked	 as	a	Credit	
Analyst	and	in	Senior	Relationship	 Management	 positions.	 He	
is	a	member	 of	the	Credit	and	Market	Risk	Committee	 of	the	
Bank.
Abena Asare-Menako: Acting Chief Compliance Officer.  
She	is	an	experienced	 banking	 professional	 with	expertise	 in	
Resource	 Management,	 Retail	Banking,	 Business/Corporate	
Banking, Sales, Marketing, Relationship Management, Card 
and POS (Payments) Management, Banking Operations, 
Operational	 Risk,	Compliance	 Management	 and	Project	
Management.	 She	possesses	 excellent	 interpersonal,	 analytical	
and	organizational	 skills	with	the	ability	to	excel	within	highly	
competitive environments where leadership skills are the keys 
to	success.	 She	is	an	effective	 manager	 with	the	proven	skills	
necessary to direct, train and motivate human resource to its 
fullest potential while also possessing a strong capacity to focus 
on strategic intent with revenue generation and management 
of	cost.	She	is	also	responsible	 for	ensuring	 the	Bank	complies	
with	all	relevant	 anti-money	 laundering	 regulations	 by	
providing advice to management and ensuring compliance 
with	local	and	related	Financial	 Security	 Topics	including	 but	
not	limited	to	Anti-Money	 Laundering,	 Sanctions	 and	Embargo,	
KYC	and	Correspondent	 Banking.	 She	holds	a	Masters	degree	in	
Finance	 from	University	 of	Leicester,	 U.K.	and	is	an	Associate	 of	
the Chartered Institute of Bankers, Ghana and the Institute of 
Marketing	U.K.
Catherine Johnson: General Manager Treasury and Global 
Markets.	 	 She	holds	a	BSc	Accounting	 Degree	from	Cardiff	KEY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL
9
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCUniversity	 in	Wales	and	is	a	member	 of	the	Association	
Cambiste	 Internationale	 (ACI)	based	in	Paris	She	also	holds	
a Master’s Degree in International Securities, Investments 
and Banking from the ISMA Centre, Henley Business School, 
UK	with	a	special	focus	on	Financial	 Engineering	 and	Fixed	
Income	Solutions.	 She	has	over	20	years’	extensive	 commercial	
banking	 experience	 both	in	Ghana	 and	internationally.		
Her vast experience over the years cover areas of Strategy, 
Business Development, Treasury Management, Corporate 
Banking,	 Balance	 Sheet	Risk	Management	 and	Market/Trading	
activities.	 She	is	currently	 in	charge	of	managing	 the	assets	and	
liabilities	structure	of	the	bank	and	has	direct	responsibility	for	
developing	 market/trading	 teams,	products/solutions,	 funding	
and	the	general	 trading	 framework.	 She	also	manages	 key	
treasury relationships with the Regulator, Financial Institutions 
and	Clients.		
Fred Obosu: General Manager Corporate Coverage. He holds 
a Master of Business Administration from the Kwame Nkrumah 
University	 of	Science	 &	Technology,	 Bachelor	 of	Arts	(Hons)	
degree	in	Economics	 from	the	University	 of	Cape	Coast;	Bsc	
(Hons) in Banking Practice and Management from IFS School 
of	Finance	 UK	and	a	Professional	 Post	Graduate	 Diploma	 in	
Marketing	 from	the	Chartered	 Institute	 of	Marketing	 UK.	With	
over 15 years’ experience in the Banking Industry, he has gained 
significant	 experience	 in	Corporate	 and	Investment	 Banking,	
Commercial/SME	 banking,	 Product	 &	Business	 Development,	
Cash	Management,	 Supply/Value	 Chain	Financing,	 International	
Trade	Finance	spanning	various	industries	and	sectors.	
Obed Hoyah: General Manager Retail Business. He holds a 
Master	of	Science	degree	in	Management	 from	the	University	 of	
Maryland	 University	 College	(Graduate	 School	of	Management	
&	Technology)	 in	Maryland,	 USA	and	a	Bachelor	 of	Science	
degree in Accounting from Rhode Island College, Providence, 
RI,	USA.		Obed	is	a	seasoned	 banker	who	has	worked	in	different	
capacities	 in	the	bank,	as	Head	of	SME,	Pre-Recoveries,	 and	
Credit	&	Operational	 Risk	before	taking	on	a	role	at	Retail	
Banking.		 He	was	the	Project	Manager	 for	the	RUBI	Project,	
which transformed the structure of the network from an 
Operational	 organization	 to	a	Sales	and	Service	outfit.		He	has	
over	20	years	of	experience	 in	the	industry	 both	in	Ghana	and	
the	USA,	where	he	started	his	banking	career.
Dorcas Quaye: Head Human Resource Management. She 
holds a BA in Social Sciences from the Kwame Nkrumah 
University	 of	Science	 and	Technology,	 and	is	a	certified	 AML/	
SANCTIONS	 and	EMBARGO	 practitioner.	 She	has	over	30	
years	of	rich	and	full	rounded	 banking	 experience	 in	branch	
management,	 Retail	and	SME	businesses,	 and	Operational	
Risk	management.	 As	a	branch	manager,	 she	managed	 three	
branches,	 and	thereafter	 she	was	appointed	 as	the	Head	of	
the	SME	Business	 Banking	 Unit.	She	was	appointed	 the	Head	
of	Compliance,	 AML	&	CFT	when	the	unit	was	created	 in	the	
Bank	in	2010.	In	October	 2015,	she	was	appointed	 as	the	Head	of Permanent Control and Operational, Risk, with oversight 
responsibility	 for	Managerial	 Supervision,	 Business	 Continuity	
and Crisis Management, Compliance Anti Money Laundering 
and	Operational	 Risk.	In	2020	Dorcas	was	appointed	 Head	
Human Resource Management
Frank Lawoe: Head of Internal Audit. A Chartered Accountant 
by	profession,he	 holds	a	Bachelor	 of	Commerce	 degree	from	
the	University	 of	Cape	Coast	and	Executive	 MBA	in	Finance	 from	
the	University	 of	Ghana.	He	is	also	a	Member	 of	the	Institute	
of Chartered Accountants (Ghana) and Institute of Internal 
Auditors	 (Ghana).	 He	has	over	17	years’	experience	 in	banking	
with strong and proven expertise in internal audit, credit risk 
management,	 retail	and	corporate	 banking,	 and	debt	recovery.	
Paul Agyenim Boateng: Head, Permanent  Control. He is a 
chartered Accountant (CA Ghana) and a Chartered Taxation 
practitioner	 by	profession.	 He	also	holds	an	MBA	from	the	
Business	 School,	University	 of	Ghana,	Legon	and	an	M.Phil	in	
Development	 Project	Analysis	 (AgricEcons)	 from	the	Faculty	of	
Agric,	Univeristy	 of	Ghana,	Legon.		He	has	extensive	 knowledge	
in	banking	 and	has	worked	 in	various	 capacities	 in	Retail	
Banking	 and	Inspection	 as	an	Inspector,	 Mission	Head	&	Head	
Inspection.		 Paul	has	also	worked	 in	the	Finance	 department	
as Deputy Head Finance and Acting Head Finance and then 
to	IT	Department	 as	Deputy	Head	of	the	Microbanker	 Banker	
Project	(a	core	banking	 software).	 In	addition,	 he	was	engaged	
as	the	Anti-Money	 Laundering	 Officer	of	the	Bank	and	Head	
of	Permanent	 supervision	 at	the	same	time.	In	2014,	he	was	
appointed	 as	the	Head,	Internal	 Audit	and	in	2018	posted	
to Permanent Control as Head, in charge of Managerial 
Supervision	 &	Business	 Continuity,	 Operational	 Risk,	Branch	PS	
Control	and	KYC	Quality	Control.	
Lawrence Ribeiro: Head, Logistics & Support. He holds 
a Post Graduate Diploma in Legal Studies from the Ghana 
School of Law, Executive Master of Business Administration 
(Finance	 option)	 from	the	University	 of	Ghana,	 Legon	and	
BSc	Electrical/Electronic	 Engineering	 degree	from	the	Kwame	
Nkrumah	 University	 of	Science	 and	Technology.	 In	the	last	
seventeen	 years,	he	has	built	extensive	 experience	 in	enterprise	
IT	management	 and	service	delivery.	 He	is	also	experienced	
in	Logistics	 and	Estate	management.	 He	worked	 in	various	
capacities as Head of Data Centre Operations, Head of Network 
and System, Head of IT Security and Business Continuity 
Planning	and	Head	of	Information	Systems	and	Technology.
Adwoa Asieduaa Ntirakwa: Head Organisation & Projects.  
She	is	a	product	 of	the	University	 of	Ghana	Business	 School	
with a BSc in Banking and Finance Option and a Master of 
Business	 Administration	 (Project	 Management	 Option)	 from	
the	Ghana	Institute	 of	Management	 and	Public	Administration.	
She	is	also	a	professionally	 qualified	 member	 of	the	Chartered	
Institute of Bankers (Ghana) and is a Lean Six Sigma trained – Key Management Personnel cont’d
10
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCGreen	Belt.	She	is	also	a	coach	in	Prism	Methodology	 and	has	
trained	a	number	 of	staff	members	 on	the	Prism	Methodology.	
Adwoa has 16 years’ experience in Banking in the areas of 
Retail	Banking	 and	Project	Management.	 In	her	current	 role	
as	the	Head	of	Organization	 and	Projects,	 she	is	responsible	
for	the	Bank’s	Project	 Management	 Portfolio	 and	Methods/	
Procedures,	 ensuring	 that	Projects	 are	delivered	 for	the	Banks	
Functional	Teams	in	line	with	their	Business	strategy.
Elikplim Muzzu: Head, Marketing Multichannels and Quality.  
Mr	Muzzu	 is	a	seasoned,	 multi-disciplinary	 marketing	
management, corporate communications and change 
management	 executive	 with	over	22	years	proven	record	of	
growing	 lasting	brands	 and	managing	 multi-million	 dollar	
projects	 across	Ghana.	 With	a	passion	 for	brands	 and	a	
strong	business	 judgement	 and	interpersonal	 skills,	he	has	
successfully	 managed	 many	client	projects	 and	developed	
many	successful	 brands	on	the	local	market	and	in	the	process	turning	these	brands	into	profitable	 and	successful	 businesses.	
A consummate professional, he has within the last decade 
and	a	half	worked	 within	the	Ghanaian	 banking	 industry	 and	
held	senior	executive	 roles	in	United	Bank	for	Africa	(UBA)	
Ghana	Limited	 and	First	Atlantic	 Bank	Limited,	 responsible	 for	
Marketing,	 Corporate	 Communications	 and	Service	Quality.	 He	
also worked at Barclays Bank Ghana Limited where he served 
as the Programme Manager for Brand and Name Change during 
the	bank’s	brand	transition	 to	Absa	Bank	Ghana	Limited.	
He	holds	a	Master’s	 Degree	in	International	 Affairs	from	the	
University	 of	Ghana’s	 Legon	Centre	for	International	 Affairs	
and Diplomacy in addition to a Master’s Degree in Business 
Administration	from	GIMPA.Key Management Personnel cont’d
11
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCDistinguished	 shareholders	 on	behalf	of	the	Board	of	Directors	
and Management of Societe Generale Ghana PLC, I am pleased 
to welcome you to the 41st Annual General Meeting  of our Bank 
and	present	 to	you	for	the	first	time	in	my	capacity	 as	Board	
Chair, the Audited Annual Report and Financial Statements for 
the	financial	year	ended	31	December	2020.	
Economic environment
This	year	has	been	a	challenging	 one	generally	 for	the	
global	economy	 as	a	result	of	the	global	health	crisis	and	its	
attendant	 ripple	effects	on	many	aspects	 of	human	existence.	
Many	countries	 faced	a	multi-layered	 crisis	comprising	 a	
health	shock,	domestic	 economic	 and	financial	 disruptions,	
plummeting	 external	 demand,	 capital	 ﬂow	 reversals,	 and	a	
collapse	in	commodity	prices.
There	is	however	 much	reason	to	be	hopeful.	 Testing	has	been	
ramped	 up,	treatments	 are	improving,	 vaccines	 have	been	
approved and rolled out, and recent data shows that many 
economies have started to recover at a faster pace than earlier 
anticipated.
According	 to	the	IMF,	global	growth	is	expected	 to	increase	 to	
5.5	percent	 in	2021	and	4.2	percent	 in	2022	after	an	estimated	
contraction	 of	3.5	percent	 in	2020.	Global	trade	volumes,	
consistent	 with	recovery	 in	global	activity	 is	also	forecasted	
to	grow	about	8	percent	 in	2021,	before	moderating	 to	6	
percent	 in	2022.	Inﬂation	 is	also	expected	 to	remain	subdued	
for	the	next	two	years.	Global	financial	 conditions	 have	also	
generally	 improved,	 characterized	 by	a	general	 increase	 in	
investor	 confidence	 and	expectation,	 rising	risk	asset	prices,	
and	an	ongoing	 rebound	 of	portfolio	ﬂows	 to	emerging	 market	
economies.
The economic situation in Africa generally mirrors that of the 
world.	GDP	contracted	 by	2.1	percent	 this	year,	the	continent’s	
first	recession	 in	half	a	century.	 The	pandemic	 shock	and	
ensuing economic crisis have had direct implications for 
budgetary	 balances	 and	debt	burdens.	 According	 to	the	African	
Development	 Bank,	the	average	 debt-to-GDP	 ratio	for	Africa	is	
expected	 to	climb	by	10	to	15	percentage	 points	in	the	short	
to	medium	 term.	That	means	serious	debt	challenges	 might	be	
looming, and disorderly defaults and lengthy resolutions could 
become	 a	major	obstacle	 to	Africa’s	progress	 toward	prosperity
Core	inﬂation	 (in	food	and	energy	prices)	has	also	risen	in	
many	African	countries.	 Significant	 currency	 depreciation	 has	
occurred, particularly in frontier market economies, partly as a 
result	of	the	disruptions	 in	external	 financial	ﬂows—including	
remittances, foreign direct investment, portfolio investment, 
and	official	development	 assistance.	 In	light	of	all	these	
however,	 GDP	is	forecasted	 to	grow	at	3.4	percent	 in	2021.	It	
is expected that countercyclical easy monetary policy and 
fiscal	stimulus	 packages	 will	support	 the	continent’s	 economic	
recovery.
Operating environment
Ghana’s	 economy	 showed	 resilience	 after	recording	 a	strong	
growth	of	6.5	percent	 in	2019.	In	the	first	quarter	of	2020,	Real	
GDP	growth	stood	at	4.9	percent.	 However,	 this	momentum	
was	significantly	 curtailed	 generally	 due	to	a	slump	in	oil	
prices	and	weakened	 global	economic	 activity	caused	by	the	COVID-	19	pandemic.	
Following	 the	lifting	of	restrictions	 and	strong	policy	support,	
signs	of	recovery	 begun	to	emerge	 in	the	third	quarter.	
Provisional	 data	released	 by	the	Ghana	Statistical	 Service	
showed	 that	real	GDP	growth	contracted	 by	1.1	percent	 in	
the	third	quarter	 of	2020	as	compared	 to	the	3.2	percent	
contraction	 recorded	 in	the	second	quarter.	 The	upward	 trend	
is	expected	 to	continue.	 According	 to	Fitch	Research	 analysts,	
real	GDP	growth	is	expected	 to	increase	 from	an	estimated	 1.2	
percent	at	the	end	of	December	 2020	to	4.5	percent	in	2021,	and	
4.3	percent	in	2022
Inﬂationary	 pressure,	 which	mounted	 in	April	2020	on	account	
of	pandemic-related	 measures,	 started	easing	in	August	2020	
on	the	back	of	declining	 food	prices,	partly	reﬂecting	 effects	
of	seasonal	 factors.	This	resulted	 in	an	end	of	year	inﬂation	 of	
10.4	percent	 above	the	central	bank’s	target	range	of	8	+/-2.	
Forecasts	 from	Fitch	Research	 point	to	an	average	 inﬂation	 rate	
of	8.7	percent	in	2021	and	8.2	percent	in	2022	
Ghana’s	 provisional	 total	public	debt	stock	as	at	end	of	
December	 2020	stood	at	GH¢291,614	 million,	representing	 76.1	
percent	 of	GDP,	compared	 to	GH¢217,991	 million,	 equivalent	
to	62.4	percent	 of	GDP	in	2019.	One	of	the	major	components	
accounting	 for	the	increase	 in	the	public	debt	is	the	fiscal	
impact	 of	Covid-19	 expenses	 which	amounted	 to	GH¢19.7	
billion	in	2020.	The	country	 recorded	 an	overall	fiscal	deficit	of	
11.7	percent	of	GDP	at	the	end	of	December	 2020.	This	is	mainly	
attributed	 to	revenue	 shortfall	 from	weak	economic	 activity	
and	unanticipated	 increased	 health	expenditure.	 The	deficit	
was	financed	from	both	the	domestic	and	external	sources.
The	current	 account	 deficit	narrowed	 because	 of	reduced	
demand	 for	imports.	 According	 to	the	MPC	press	release	in	
January	 2021,	crude	oil	prices	declined	 by	22.9	percent	 year-
on-year	 in	December	 2020,	driven	mainly	by	weak demand. 
Crude	oil	prices	averaged	 US$50.2	 per	barrel,	compared	 with	
US$65.2	 per	barrel	a	year	ago.	In	contrast,	 gold	prices	went	up	
by	25.4	percent	 to	an	average	 of	US$1,857.2	 per	fine	ounce,	
strongly	 supported	 by	accommodative	 monetary	 policy,	
increased	 uncertainty,	 and	the	global	economic	 slowdown	 due	
to	the	pandemic.	 Cocoa	prices	averaged	 US$2,581.3	 per	tonne	
in	December	2020,	up	by	2.5	percent	on	a	year-on-year	basis.
Ghana’s	 Gross	International	 Reserves	 rose	to	$8,624	million	
at	the	end	of	December	 2020	from	$8,418	million	recorded	
at	the	end	of	December	 2019.	The	current	level	of	reserves	 is	BOARD CHAIR’S STATEMENT
12
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCsufficient	 to	provide	cover	for	about	4.1	months	 of	importation	
bills	above	the	forecast	 cover	of	4.0	months.	 The	country’s	
strong	reserve	position	 has	resulted	 in	stability	 in	the	foreign	
exchange	 market	despite	capital	ﬂow	 reversals	 as	a	result	of	the	
heightened	global	uncertainty
The	exchange	 rate	between	 the	Ghana	cedi	and	US	dollar	
remained	 stable	with	volatility	 reﬂecting	 seasonal	 import-
driven	demand.	 Increased	 public	debt	and	shortfalls	 in	
domestic revenues pose challenges to further macroeconomic 
improvements.	 The	cedi	has	cumulatively	 depreciated	 against	
the	US	Dollar	and	Euro	by	3.9	percent	 and	12.1	percent	
respectively	on	a	year	to	date	basis.
2020 Operating  results
The	year	has	been	a	challenging	 one	for	the	industry	 in	Ghana	
and	globally.	 However		 the	performance	 of	the	bank	for	2020	
was	encouraging	 given	the	global	pandemic	 currently	 sweeping	
through	 the	country	and	world	as	a	whole.	The	Profit	After	Tax	of	
the	bank	for	this	year	stood	at	GH¢	154,208,915		 and		compared	
favorably	 to	the	2019	performance	 of	GH¢	128,542,186.	 Some	
indicators	 worth	mentioning	 are	the	Net	Banking	 Income	(7.8%	
growth)	 ,	Operating	 expenses	 (6.0%	growth)Total	 Assets	(15.1%	
growth	)	and	Total	Shareholders’	 Funds(15.4%	 growth).	 All	in	all	
the	bank	remained	 resilient	 and	recorded	 gains	on	most	of	its	
notable	indicators.
Share performance
At	the	start	of	the	year	2020	our	share	price	was	GH¢0.72.		 By	
the	second	half	of	2020	the	share	price	fell	to	GH¢0.60.	 The	year	
2020	saw	our	share	price	decrease	 to	GH¢0.64	 when	compared	
to	the	beginning	of	the	year	performance.
Change of name to Societe Generale Ghana PLC
Shareholders	 by	a	special	resolution	 granted	 approval	 on	20	
July	2020	for	the	name	of	the	company	 to	be	changed.		 The	
Registrar	 of	Companies	 granted	 approval	 on	23	November	 2020	
pursuant	 to	Section	 21(1)(b)	 of	the	Companies	 Act	,2019	(Act	
992).	The	Bank	of	Ghana	also	approved	 the	name	change	of	the	
Bank.		
Changes in the Board of Directors
Mr	Kofi	Ampim	stepped	 down	as	Board	Chairman	 in	line	with	
the	Bank	of	Ghana	Corporate	 Governance	 Directive	 2018	on	
30	September	 2020.			The	Board,	management	 and	Staff	of	
Societe	Generale	 Ghana	PLC	are	deeply	saddened	 by	the	death	
of	Mr.	Kofi	Ampim	,the	immediate	 past	Board	Chairman	 which	
occured	on	30	January	2021.	
From	1992	to	2003,	for	a	period	of	10	years,	the	late	Mr	Kofi	
Ampim was the Ghana Country Representative for the Societe 
Generale	Group.	
Mr	Kofi	Ampim	joined	the	Board	of	Directors	 of	the	Bank	in	March	
2003	when	the	Societe	Generale	 Group	took	over	the	controlling	
interest	 in	the	Bank	Societe	Generale	 Ghana	PLC.	At	the	280th	
Board of Directors meeting of Societe Generale Ghana, held 
in	La	Defense	 Paris	on	15	November	 2012,	the	Directors	 of	the	
Bank	appointed	 the	late	Mr	Kofi	Ampim	as	the	first	Ghanaian	
Chairman of the Board a position he held and served faithfully until	30	September	 2020	when	he	stepped	 down	as	Chairman	
after	a	Virtual	Extra	Ordinary	General	Meeting	of	the	Bank.	
I	would	like	to	posthumously	 thank	Mr	Kofi	Ampim	 for	his	
exemplary	leadership	and	direction	of	the	Board.	
The Bank of Ghana granted approval for the Board Chairperson 
on	15	September	 2020	and	Mrs	Margaret	 Boateng	 Sekyere	
assumed	the	Board	Chair	on	1	October	2020.
Corporate governance
Our	Bank	is	committed	 to	ensuring	 effective	 corporate	
governance and sound risk management, which are of 
fundamental	 importance	 in	banking	 business.		 The	Companies	
Act,	2019	(Act	992);	The	Banks	and	Specialised	 Deposit	 Taking	
Institutions	 Act	2016	(Act	930);	the	Bank	of	Ghana’s	 Corporate	
Governance	 Directive	 2018;	the	Securities	 Industry	 Act	2016		
(Act	292);	the	Securities	 and	Exchange	 Commission	 the		
Corporate	 Governance	 Code	for	Listed	Companies	 2020;	the	
Securities and Exchange Regulations as well as the Continuing 
Listing Requirements of the Ghana Stock Exchange provide us 
with	the	regulatory	 framework	 for	ensuring	 effective	 corporate	
governance,	 anti-money	 laundering	 and	combating	 financing	
of	terrorism.
Outlook for the year 2021
The	year	2020	saw	very	peaceful	 elections	 and	the	deepening	
of	Ghana’s	 democracy.		 For	the	year	2021	we	will	continue	 to	
deepen	 our	stakeholder	 relationships	 by	liaising	 with	our	
customers,	 our	communities	 and	our	regulators.	 	 We	will	
continue to work in close liaison with the Bank of Ghana to 
strengthen	our	Regulatory	Framework.
Acknowledgement 
On	behalf	of	the	Board	of	Directors,	 I	wish	to	express	my	sincere	
gratitude to all shareholders of Societe Generale Ghana for your 
continued support and interest in the Bank  I also extend my 
appreciation	 to	the	Management	 and	staff	of	our	Bank	for	their	
untiring	 efforts	during	a	very	difficult	 year.		My	gratitude	 goes	
to my colleagues on the Board, I wish to express my heartfelt 
gratitude	 to	our	cherished	 customers	 for	their	unﬂinching	
support,	 loyalty	and	patronage.		 Together	 we	are	continuing	
to	build	Societe	 Generale	 Ghana	into	the	Preferred	 Banking	
Institution	in	Ghana.	Thank	you	for	your	attention.			
MARGARET BOATENG SEKYERE,  
BOARD CHAIRBoard Chair’s Statement cont’d
13
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCI am pleased to share with you the progress and achievement 
made	during	2020	and	to	share	with	you	a	review	of	our	
operations and the performance of your Company for the year 
2020.
2020 Operating Results
The	economic	 terrain	in	the	year	2020	was	undulating	 not	only	
for	the	banking	 sector	but		across	all	industries.	 The	surge	of	
the	COVID	19	pandemic	 during	the	year	led	to	a	visible	change	
in	our	banking	 operations	 and	also	had	an	impact	on	the	
various	projections	 of	growth	and	performance	 that	had	been	
made.	Your	bank	SG	Ghana	surmounted	 all	these	obvious	
challenges	 and	recorded	 a	growth	in	profits	of	20.0%.	A	major	
contributor	 to	this	sterling	performance	 is	the	Net	Cost	of	Risk	
which	improved	 over	the	year	by	39.3%.Treasury	 activities	 for	
the	year	also	saw	a	significant	 improvement	 growing	 by	26.7%.	
The	deposit	 portfolio	 of	the	bank	grew	by	9.1%.	The	marginal	
growth was somewhat expected given the liquidity crunch due 
to	the	COVID	19	situation.	 The	loan	book	of	the	bank	however	
saw	a	decline	of	3.1%.	
Review of operations for 2020 
Human resources management
The	HR	function	 in	the	year	2020	provided	 the	needed	support	
for the workforce in the organization during the uncertain 
pandemic	 environment.	 The	various	strategies	 that	were	put	in	
place	to	ensure	continuity	in	employee	productivity	were:	
 yDecongestion	 of	the	Head	office	to	allow	staff	to	work	from	
other	branch	locations;	
 yPiloting	 of	the	‘working	 from	home’	concept	 for	certain	job	
roles;	
 yStrict	management	of	the	Bank’s	leave	policy;	
 y The adoption of remote training activities such as 
teleconferencing	and	the	use	of	digital	platforms.	
Despite	all	these,	the	department	rolled	out	the	following:	
 y An internally developed HR Employee Self Service (ESS) 
tool	to	assist	in	the	management	of	staff	requests;	
 yThe	setup	of	a	Mobility	 Committee	 to	consciously	 see	to	
the movement of employees across the organization to 
develop	the	quality	of	staff.
Corporate coverage department
The Corporate Coverage Department underwent further 
reorganization	 and	restructuring	 in	2020.	The	Middle	Market	
Unit	was	further	de-compartmentalized	 into	two	as	Commercial	
Banking	and	Business	Banking	based	on	turnovers.	This	was	to	
re	align	focus	and	targeted	 business	 development	 of	the	SME	
portfolio.	 While	the	Commercial	 Banking	 unit	is	domiciled	 at	the	
head	office,	the	Business	 Banking	 unit	provides	 geographical	
representation	 of	corporate	 coverage	 in	significant	 regions	of	Ghana	on	a	sustained	basis.	
Global	Transaction	 Banking	 Department	 in	2020	was	merged	
into the Corporate Coverage Department to create a more 
collaborative	 working	 relationship	 between	 relationship	
managers	 and	product	 experts.	 The	Department	 is	thus	now	
segmented	 as	Global	Corporates	 (Multinationals),	 Local	Large	
Corporates,	 Public	Sector	Business,	 Commercial	 Banking,	
Business	 Banking	 and	the	Global	Transaction	 Banking	 units.	
The new structure will continue to facilitate adequate time for 
coaching	 and	allow	the	various	sector	heads	build	the	capacity	
of	their	teams	and	affords	them	the	opportunity	 to	develop	 and	
deepen	 their	knowledge	 towards	 becoming	 experts	 in	their	
respective sectors of operation whilst working closely with 
product	experts.
The	active	participation	 in	debt	syndication	 and	structured	
finance	deals	as	well	as	the	performance	 of	lead	arranger	 roles	
for these deals were with the support of our local and regional 
structured	 finance	teams.	The	securing	 of	big	ticket	corporate	
loan facilities helped grow the portfolio of the segment over the 
year.	The	deliberate	 and	conscious	 effort	via	capex	financing	
and medium to long term loans to change the structure of the 
asset	book	would	continue	 to	ensure	marked	 reduction	 of	the	
impact of the volatility of the short term loans on the total loan 
book
With the support of other stakeholders, the department 
worked	 hard	to	get	SG	Ghana	affiliated	 to	the	Ghana.Gov/
UNIPASS	 payment	 platform	 and	ensure	the	physical	 presence	
of	the	bank	at	the	strategic	 entry	points	of	Ghana	like	Tema	and	
Takoradi	 ports,	Kotoka	International	 Airport,	 Aﬂao	and	Paga.	
The department also targeted customer acquisition as well as 
retention	 of	major	deposit	 generating	 clients	and	aggressive	
sale	of	our	cash	management	 and	bill	payment	 platforms.	 This	
move	would	be	continued	 and	reinforced	 with	the	coming	into	
full	operation	of	YUP.	
The Corporate coverage department will continue to deploy 
the	Global	Transaction	 Banking	 (GTB)	experts,	 their	products	
(Factoring, Cash management and Trade) and tools whilst 
collaborating	 with	Treasury	 teams	in	the	sale	and	closure	of	
Swaps,	forwards,	 forex	sales	etc.	The	joint	presentations	 to	
customers	 and	prospects	 would	be	intensified	 for	maximum	MANAGING DIRECTOR’S REVIEW
14
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCrealization	 of	the	benefits	 of	the	value	chain	and	cross	selling	
strategy	 in	order	to	be	able	to	improve	 revenue	 in	general	and	
fees	in	particular.
Retail banking 
The	year	2020	began	well	with	a	lot	of	optimism,	 which	was	
quickly	whittled	 away	with	the	onset	of	Covid	19.		Consequently,	
the	business	 shifted	into	a	crisis	management	 mode	for	the	
most part of the year to ensure that we manage the fallout in 
order	to	protect	and	preserve	 the	business	 we	held	prior	to,	
and	to	guard	against	any	major	setbacks	 by	the	time	stability	
is	restored.		And	to	a	large	extent	we	succeeded	in	doing	that.		
Despite the challenges, we succeeded in growing our deposit 
stock	appreciably,	 on	a	year-on-year	 basis	in	excess	of	24%.		
This	is	due	to	the	strategic	 forecasting	 up	to	the	end	of	2019,	
where	Retail	decided	 to	make	deposit	 mobilization	 a	key	
performance indicator for our teams, and therefore put in 
place the necessary frameworks in terms of product focus and 
adjustments	 in	objectives.		 On	the	asset	side,	we	experienced	
significant	 challenges	 as	Covid	severely	 impacted	 a	number	 of	
the	institutions	 we	deal	with	in	a	number	 of	key	sectors	such	as	
tourism	 &	hospitality,	 aviation,	 education,	 manufacturing	 and	
certain	service	industries.		 We	therefore	 had	to	suspend	 lending	
to almost 100 institutions, and worked on loan repayment 
moratoriums	 for	a	number	 of	other	institutions.	 A	number	 of	
borrowers	 defaulted	 on	their	loans	due	to	layoffs	and	other	
difficulties	 encountered	 during	the	course	of	the	pandemic.		 In	
spite	of	these	challenges	 we	were	able	to	maintain	 our	stock	of	
loans	and	even	grew	the	book	marginally	in	excess	of	2%.
In	addition	 to	the	above	results	on	the	key	business	 KPIs,	other	
significant	 projects	 and	restructuring	 that	Retail	also	embarked	
in	the	course	of	the	year:
1. Market collections strategy/branch: This strategy is 
aimed	at	improving	 our	deposit	mobilisation,	 by	setting	up	
a	new	model	designed	 to	operate	 as	a	cash	collection	 hub	
for	the	Bank.	The	target	customers	 are	traders/businesses	
within	the	Makola	market	and	its	environs.	 The	model	will	
be	rolled	out	in	Q1	2021.
The	proposed	model	includes:
 yA	Branch	-	This	branch	will	function	 as	a	normal	branch	on	
its	own.
 yCash	Collection	 Centre	–	this	will	focus	on	the	mobilization	
of	deposits	from	customers	on	a	daily	basis.
 yRetail	Chinese	 Desk	-	this	will	focus	on	onboarding	 new	
Chinese	 clients	and	ensuring	 the	banking	 needs	of	Chinese	
customers	within	the	vicinity	are	met.
 yYup	Centre	-	the	Centre	will	aim	to	promote	the	YUP	brand	
within the Makola market and its environs through a 
number	of	outlined	activities.2. Network development	 –	Opening	 of	Lapaz	Branch;	
Closure	of	Tema	Community	One	&	Asafo	Branches
As	part	of	the	bank’s	strategy	 to	increase	 its	presence	 in	viable	
markets,	 Lapaz	Branch	was	opened	 in	May	2020	to	cater	for	
the	banking	 needs	of	our	clients	and	prospects	 in	this	vibrant	
commercial	 and	residential	 enclave.		 Similarly,	 as	part	of	the	
efficient	 deployment	 of	our	resources	 and	branch	network	
optimization,	 two	branches,	 Tema	Community	 One	and	Asafo	
were	closed	on	21	and	31	December,	 2020	respectively.	 In	line	
with this intent, customer accounts in Tema Community One 
and	Asafo	branches	 were	transferred	 to	Tema	Community	 Two	
and Kumasi Central Branch (KCB) respectively as the account 
holding	branches.	
3. Bancassurance unit: The Bancassurance unit was created 
in	March	2020	under	Retail	Business.	 The	key	objective	 of	
this unit is to increase the Bancassurance commissions 
through product development, commercial and sales 
leads.	The	unit	is	also	responsible	 for	developing	 and	
managing	 insurance	 partnerships.		 This	setup	is	meant	to	
bring	the	necessary	 focus	and	expertise	 needed	 to	drive	
this	line	of	business,	 which	is	a	good	source	of	commission	
income.
4. Suspension of saturday banking: In the wake of the 
Covid-19	 Pandemic,	 the	bank	suspended	 Saturday	
Banking	 in	April	2020.	This	action	was	aimed	at	reducing	
face-to-face	 banking	 interaction	 during	the	pandemic.	
Customers	 were	advised	 to	use	the	available	 digital	
channels	to	access	our	services.
5. Dormant & inactive accounts management: We 
embarked	 on	an	exercise	 to	clean	up	our	account	 portfolio.	
The goal of this exercise was to identify the various 
categories of inactive and dormant accounts and close or 
reactivate them in line with the Bank of Ghana guidelines 
for	managing	 dormant	 accounts.	 A	bulk-account	 closure	
solution	 is	being	sought	from	SGABS	(technical	 support	
service)	 to	enable	us	close	all	the	accounts	 earmarked	 for	
closure.
 
6. KYC remediation & high risk KYC periodic review: In 
keeping with Bank of Ghana and SG Group regulations, 
Retail	Business	 invested	 time	and	effort	remediating	
clients and also performing KYC Periodic Review for High 
Risk	clients.	The	high	concentration	 on	KYC	remediation	
coupled	 with	the	Covid-19	 pandemic	 affected	 our	Retail	
sales	performance	especially	the	sale	of	loan	products.	
Treasury and global markets
Societe Generale Ghana operates a modern treasury that 
is	focused	 on	Trading/Markets	 and	ALM	activities.	 Treasury	
Sales	also	has	a	bouquet	 of	products	 and	services	 that	provide	
efficient	 solutions	 to	our	customers’	 needs.	The	team	has	a	Managing Directors Review cont’d
15
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLChigh	calibre	of	treasury	 professionals	 with	diverse	skills	and	
experience.	 The	Treasury	 Change	 Plan,	currently	 underway	
will	further	improve	 the	Treasury	 offering	 and	will	result	in	
more	sophisticated	 solutions,	 efficiency	 and	better	pricing	
to our customers, despite the challenges of the operating 
environment.
SG Treasury remains poised to provide appropriate hedges and 
solutions	 for	its	own	balance	 sheet	and	that	of	its	cherished	
customers.
Organisation & projects 
Organization	 and	Projects	 continues	 to	play	a	strong	role	
in	managing	 and	coordinating	 various	 projects	 that	seek	
to	promote	 efficiency	 in	banking	 operations	 and	improve	
customer	experience.
In the year under review the Bank upgraded its Core Baking 
System from Version 10 to 11 with improved architecture from 
Service	 Métiers	 Génériques	 (SMGs)/Application	 Programming	
Interface	 (APIs)	to	allow	other	applications	 to	better	interact	
with the Core Banking System and enhance customer 
satisfaction.
The Bank also successfully completed the Instant Issuing Cards 
Project,	 the	first	among	other	African	Subsidiaries.	 The	instant	
issuance of cards to customer has improved the turnaround 
time	in	delivering	cards	to	customers.
The	Interoperability	 project	when	completed	 will	allow	our	
customers to move funds from their Bank Accounts to their 
Wallets and also allow the transfer of funds to other Banks 
seamlessly.
The	year	also	saw	the	opening	 of	the	Lapaz	branch,	 the	
successful relocation of the Airport Branch to a more 
advantageous	 location	 to	improve	 visibility	 and	service	delivery	
to	our	customers.	 Plans	are	also	underway	 for	the	opening	
of	our	Derby	Avenue	 Branch	 which	will	enhance	 deposit	
mobilisation	 and	improve	 accessibility	 to	our	customers	 in	and	
around	the	vicinity.	
Operational risk and permanent control
Operational Risk and the Permanent Control department 
continue to play a critical role in deepening the risk culture in 
the	Bank.	In	2020,	Societe	Generale	 Ghana	launched	 a	number	
of innovative products and services to meet customers’ 
growing	 demands.	 Consequently,	 effective	 risk	assessments	
were performed on these products and services to enhance 
improvements	 in	our	business.	 The	risk	assessments	 focused	
on key areas of prevention, detection and timely response to 
minimize	operational	risks	in	the	Bank.	
Managerial Supervision Control activities, Business Continuity 
Plan	focused	 mainly	on	the	management	 of	COVID-19	 crisis,	
Business	 Impact	Analysis,	 Risk	Control	Self-Assessment	 (RCSA),	
which	identified	 all	the	risky	activities	 of	the	Bank	together	 with	
Risk	Awareness	 and	Sensitization	 Exercise	 formed	the	bedrock	
in strengthening the internal control systems of the Bank in 2020.
Our enhanced compliance activities also focused on strong 
ethical and regulatory standards, giving SG Ghana an overall 
sound	and	solid	image	in	risk	management	actions.
Information technology
Societe	Generale	 Ghana	has	implemented	 a	wide-range	 of	IT	
transformation plans aimed at accelerating the digital strategy 
of	the	SG	Group	by	means	of	more	open,	agile	and	ﬂexible	 IT	
infrastructure	 thereby	allowing	 the	business	 to	deliver	its	range	
of	current	and	prospective	 services	 faster	to	clients.		 The	Bank	
has implemented some digital tools to facilitate access and 
deepen	financial	inclusion	in	Ghana.		These	are	the	
 ySG	Mobile	Branch	-	using	technology	 to	bring	banking	 to	
the	doorstep	of	the	customer.	
 yOpenApp:	 Remote	 onboarding	 at	Client	location	 –	To	
facilitate	product	availability	for	the	customer.
 
 yDiGiT:	Customer	 Self-Service	 –	Balance	 enquiries,	 loan	
simulation,	 branch	location	 search	etc.	to	facilitate	 loan	
acquisition,	feedback	and	complaints.	
 ySG	Connect:	 Account	 to	account	 transfer.	 Account	 to	Wallet	
and	Bill	payment.	
Marketing, multi-channel and quality review 
The	Department	 in	2020	supported	 the	business	 with	the	
research and development of new products, the review and 
implementation of updated pricing for the Corporate and 
Retail Business, and the running of product campaigns to 
support	 business	 strategy.	 Business	 was	also	supported	 with	
advertising and commercial communication on products and 
services.
To improve the customer experience mystery shopping and 
voice of the customer surveys were conducted to identify 
and	address	 gaps	using	a	continuous	 improvement	 model.	A	
centralized	 complaints	 desk	ensured	 the	efficient	 resolution	 of	
customer	complaints.
The development of various data analysis measures has 
provided	 the	business	 with	monitoring	 tools,	which	are	used	
for	regular	analysis	and	decision	making.
Corporate social responsibility  
Societe Generale Ghana supported the country during the Covid 
-19	pandemic	 with	a	total	of	GH¢	1,216,667.	 This	was	made	up	
of	a	donation	 of	GH¢	500,000	 to	Covid	19	National	 Trust	Fund.	
A	donation	 of	GH¢	416,667	 through	 the	Ghana	Association	 of	
Bankers	 and	the	donation	 of	two	(2)	ventilators	 worth	GH¢	
300,000	to	two	(2)	Hospitals.
In	addition,	 following	 the	declaration	 of	Covid-19	 as	a	global	
pandemic	 by	the	World	Health	Organization	 (WHO),	Societe	
Generale	 Ghana	put	together	 a	number	 of	interventions	 to	Managing Directors Review cont’d
16
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCalleviate	 the	unanticipated	 financial	 hardships	 created	 for	its	
worst	affected		clients.
These interventions include the deferment of loan repayment 
for	up	to	six	months	for	qualified	 customers	 whose	incomes	 and	
cash	ﬂows	 are	affected	 by	the	pandemic.	 A	free	COVID-19	 Life	
Insurance	 Cover	for	all	our	customers,	 both	new	and	existing,	
subscribing	 to	our	Sound	Education	 and	Sound	Farewell	
policies	with	sum	assured	 of	up	to	GH¢	10,000	(With	Prudential).	
This	is	to	safeguard	 customers	 by	providing	 them	with	financial	
support in the unfortunate event of a diagnosis, hospitalization 
or	death	as	a	result	the	coronavirus.	 Additionally,	 in	line	with	
fee	waiver	announcement	 by	the	Ghana	Bankers	 Association,	
we	waived	some	charges	on	domestic	funds	transfers.
Compliance
The Compliance Department of Societe Generale Ghana has 
remained pivotal in ensuring that, despite the ever changing 
trends	in	the	industry,	 the	Bank,	its	Stakeholders	 and	Staff	
are continually guided and focused in ensuring regulatory 
requirements, ethical standards and professional conduct 
are	maintained	 at	high	standards.	 SG	Ghana’s	 offers	as	its	
reputation and as one of its  unique selling points, a culture 
which	respects	 and	offers	continued	 adherence	 to	local	and	
international	regulations.	
This assures our valued clients of the security of their 
investments	 and	operations	 especially	 in	these	turbulent	
financial	 times.	This	also	minimizes	 the	risk	of	regulatory	
sanctions	 and	guarantees	 the	ease	of	business	 in	the	
international	 markets,	 resulting	 in	sustainability	 and	growth	of	the	investments	 of	the	bank’s	shareholders,	 clients	and	
partners.	
The Compliance Department continues to play an essential 
role in deepening the compliance culture in the Bank and 
ensuring	 adherence	 to	Internal	 and	external	 regulations.	 The	
department will continue to focus on key compliance issues 
within the scope of Financial Crime and Regulatory Compliance 
Topics to meet its mandate within the existing framework of 
the	bank.	
The future 
With	the	stable	political	 environment,	 our	ambition	 is	to	
continue the growth of our market share on credits, deposits, 
ﬂows	and	market	activities	 and	position	 ourselves	 among	the	
major	players	of	the	banking	 sector.	The	target	is	to	grow	our	
credit	market	share	to	7.5%	by	the	end	of	2022.	The	deposit	
target	is	to	grow	the	bank’s	deposit	market	share	from	3.77%	in	
2020	to	5.2%	by	end	of	2022.	To	continue	 to	grow	our	share	of	
market	activities	 i.e.	FX,	Derivatives,	 Fixed	Income	trading	from	
our	current	ranking	to	a	market	ranking	of	6th	position	 by	2023.
Appreciation
Finally,	I	would	like	to	end	by	thanking	 the	Board	of	Directors,	
Management	 and	every	member	 of	staff	for	their	individual	
and	collective	 contribution	 to	the	organic	growth	of	the	Bank	
during	a	very	difficult	year.			
Hakim Ouzzani 
MANAGING DIRECTORManaging Directors Review cont’d
17
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCThe	Directors	 in	submitting	 to	the	shareholders	 the	financial	 statements	 of	the	Bank	for	the	year	ended	31	December	 2020	report	
as	follows:-
  2020	 2019
  GH¢		 GH¢	
	The	Bank	recorded	net	profit	before	taxation	 221,630,035		 176,691,350	
	From	which	is	deducted	taxation	of	 (67,421,120)	 (48,149,164)
 
	Giving	a	net	profit	after	taxation	of	 154,208,915		 128,542,186	
	There	was	transfer	to	statutory	reserves	of	 (38,552,229)	 (64,271,093)
	Leaving	a	profit	for	the	year	after	taxation	and	transfer	to	statutory	reserves	of	 115,656,686		 64,271,093	
	When	added	to	the	opening	balance	on	the	income	surplus	account	as	of	1	January	of	 66,161,749		 30,256,311	
	From	which	is	deducted	final	Dividend	Paid	of	 (31,911,361)	 (28,365,655)
	It	leaves	a	closing	balance	on	the	Income	Surplus	account	of	 149,907,074  66,161,749SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC REPORT 
OF THE DIRECTORS 
Objective of the company and nature of business
Societe	Generale	 Ghana	PLC	is	a	public	limited	liability	company	
incorporated	 under	the	Companies	 Act,	2019	(Act	992).			  
The company which is a Bank is listed on the Ghana Stock 
Exchange and is registered with the Ghana Investment 
Promotion	 Centre.			 The	Company	 is	licenced	 by	the	Bank	of	
Ghana	as	a	Universal	 Bank	(Class	1	No	215)	in	Ghana	under	the	
Banks	and	Specialised	 Deposit	 Taking	Institutions	 Act	,2016(	
Act	930).
Holding company
The Societe Generale Group through its wholly owned 
investment	 subsidiary	 SG	Financial	 Services	 Holding	 owns	
60.22%	 of	the	issued	capital	of	the	Company,	 thus	making	
Societe	 Generale	 Ghana	PLC	a	subsidiary	 of	the	Societe	
Generale	Group.
Investments  
SSB Investments Limited, a company incorporated in Ghana to 
manage the equity investments of the Bank is a wholly owned 
subsidiary	 of	the	Company.		 The	nature	of	the	business	 which	
the	company	is	authorized	to	carry	on	are:
 yTo	carry	on	the	business	 of	an	investment	 company	 and	
for that purpose to acquire and hold either in the name 
of the company or in that of  any nominee, shares, stocks, 
debentures,	bond	notes	and	securities	issues;	
 yTo	take	over	and	manage	all	investments	of	the	Bank;	
 y To do all such other things which may seem to the 
company’s	 directors	 to	be	incidental	 or	conducive	 to	the	
achievement	of	the	objects.With	change	in	ownership	 of	the	Company,	 the	Bank	in	2003	
indicated its intention to disinvest in SSBI in line with its policy 
and	strategy,	 to	liquidate	 SSBI	and	refocus	on	core	business.		
The	directors	 of	SSBI	at	the	time	by	a	resolution	 dated	6	August	
2003	resolved	 that	the	entire	portfolio	 of	investments	 held	by	
SSBI	be	disposed	 off.		Over	time	all	the	investments	 held	by	
the	company	 were	sold	off.	The	proceeds	 of	the	sale	of	the	
investments were credited to Societe Generale Ghana PLC as 
SSBI	is	100%	owned	by	the	bank.		SSBI	has	been	inactive	 for	a	
long time now since almost all of the investments which were 
held	under	it	had	been	sold.
In	order	to	comply	 with	Section	 73	(3)	of	the	Banks	and	
Specialized	 Deposit	 Taking	Institutions	 Act,	2016	(Act	930)	
which provides that a Bank or Specialized Deposit Taking 
institution shall not invest or hold investments in the share 
capital	of	a	body	corporate	 other	than	a	subsidiary	 of	that	bank	
or specialized deposit taking institution that represents more 
than	5%	interest	in	the	body	corporate.		
The Board of Directors of the Bank at a meeting held at 
Yaoundé	 in	Cameroun	 on	1	December,	 2017	notice	of	which	
had	been	duly	given,	authorized	 the	transfer	 of	its	10%	shares	
in	Advans	Ghana	Savings	 &	Loans	to	SSBI.		The	certificate	 for	
the	transfer	 of	Shares	to	SSBI	was	obtained	 in	2018.	To	achieve	
full convergence with Act 930, the Bank is currently working 
on operationalizing SSBI to comply with IFRS and Regulatory 
Reporting.	
The Bank has therefore put in place processes to make SSBI 
operational	 and	functional	 in	order	to	be	able	to	use	it	as	
a vehicle to hold all its other investments that exceed the 
regulatory	5%	threshold.		
On	4	November	 2019,	the	re-registration	 process	was	completed	
18
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCat the Registrar Generals Department and SSBI was issued with a 
Registration	 Number	 CS241862019;	 a	Tax	Identification	 Number	
C003107913X,	 a	Certificate	 of	Incorporation	 and	a	Certificate	 to	
Commence	 Business.		 An	application	 is	pending	 with	the	Bank	
of	Ghana	seeking	their	approval	to	fully	operationalize	SSBI.		
Stated capital
The Bank has complied with the minimum stated capital 
requirement	 for	universal	 banking	 as	directed	 by	the	Bank	of	
Ghana.
Changes in Board of Directors and Senior Management
Retirement of Directors
Mr	Kofi	Ampim	retired	as	a	Director	 of	the	Bank	on	30	September	
2020	pursuant	 to	the	Bank	of	Ghana	Corporate	 Governance	
Directive	December	2018.		He	passed	on	30	January	2021				
Appointment of Board Chair 
In line with the Bank of Ghana’s Corporate Governance Directive, 
the Banking Supervision Department approved Mrs Margaret 
Boateng	 Sekyere	 as	Board	Chairperson	 on	15	September	 2020	
and	she	assumed	the	Board	Chair	on	1	October	2020.
Appointment of Non-Executive Director
Mr Fosuhene Acheampong was nominated to the Board in 
April	2020	with	Bank	of	Ghana	granting	 approval	 of	the	said	
nomination	 on	3	June	2020.		He	is	a	chartered	 accountant	 by	
profession and holds an MBA in Finance from the Lagos State 
University	 and	a	Bsc	in	Accounting	 from	the	University	 of	Lagos.	
He is currently the Director of Finance and Administration at 
the	Cedar	Seal	Company	Limited.		
Appointment of independent Non-Executive Director
Mr	Francis	Awua-Kyerematen	 is	an	Independent	 Non-Executive	
Director.		 He	is	a	Fellow	of	the	Association	 of	Chartered	 Certified	
Accountants.		 He	holds	a	Master	of	Business	 Administration	
from	the	University	 of	Chicago	 Business	 School	and	a	Bachelor	
of Arts Honours Degree in Accounting and Finance from the 
Middlesex	 University	 London	 UK.		He	is	the	Principal	 Advisor	
and	Managing	 Director	 for	Winchmore	 Capital.	 	 Mr	Awua-
Kyerematen	 has	worked	 as	the	Country	 Director	 for	Citibank	
Ghana	from	2008	to	2016;	prior	to	moving	 to	Ghana,	he	was	
with	Citigroup	 in	the	London	Office	responsible	 for	Debt	Capital	
Markets	 –	Middle	East	&	African	Desk	from	2005.		He	also	worked	
as a Senior Compliance Accountant for HM Revenue Customs 
in	the	UK	from	1998	to	2003.		He	also	spent	a	year	with	Grant	
Thornton	 Ipswich	 Office	UK	as	a	Senior	Corporate	 Finance	 and	
Recovery	 Associate	 from	1997	to	1998.		Mr	Awua-Kyerematen	
was	nominated	 to	the	Board	14	December	 2020	with	Bank	of	
Ghana	granting	 approval	 to	the	said	nomination	 on	23	February	
2021.
Re-election of Directors
In	accordance	 with	Section	 88	(1)	of	the	Constitution	 of	the	
Company,	 Mrs	Laurette	 Korkor	Otchere	 retires	by	rotation	 and	being	eligible;	offers	herself	for	re-election.
Laurette Korkor Otchere:  She is a Barrister at Law and a Deputy 
Director	 General	Operations	 and	Benefits	 at	Social	Security	 and	
National	 Insurance	 Trust.		She	holds	a	Juris	Doctor;	a	Bachelor	
of	Arts	in	Economics	 and	is	a	Certified	 Professional	 in	Human	
Resources	 (SHRM-CP).		 She	is	a	member	 of	the	Ghana	Bar,	State	
of	New	Jersey	Bar	and	the	United	States	District	Court,	District	
of	New	Jersey.		She	is	an	Adjunct	Professor	 at	Rutgers	University	
School	of	Management	 and	Labour	Relations	 and	the	Society	
for	Human	Resource	 Management.		 She	has	extensive	 working	
and	professional	 experience	 internationally	 and	locally.		 She	
joined	the	Board	of	Directors	 in	July	2017	with	Bank	of	Ghana	
granting	approval	on	6	September	2017.
Election of Directors 
In	accordance	 with	Section	72(1)	and	90	of	the	Constitution	 of	
the	Bank,	Mr	Francis	Awua-Kyerematen	 was	appointed	 as	an	
Independent	 Non	Executive	 Director	 of	the	Bank	and	offers	
himself	for	election.	
Changes in Senior Management
 y Mr Ernest Kuetche	 the	Deputy	Managing	 Director	 was	re-
assigned	to	SG	in	Morocco.		
 y Mr Mohamed Fehri, the Chief Finance and Administrative 
Officer	was	appointed	 as	the	SG	West	African	Regional	
Chief	Finance	Officer.		
 y Mr Cedric Chaux	 Head	of	Marketing	 was	re-assigned	 to	
the	SG	Head	Office	in	Paris;	
 y Mr Albert Ofori , Head Human resource was appointed as 
Governance	Manager.	
 y Ms Jerodine Bampoe Addo	 was	re-assigned	 to	the	
Corporate Banking Department 
 y Mr Nii Arday Wontumi resigned as the Head of the Legal 
Department.	
The	following	appointments	were	made	in	2020	:		
 y Mr Francois Pousse	as	the	Deputy	Managing	Director;	
 y Mr Felix Adjaku	as	the	Chief	Finance	Officer.		
 y Ms Abena Asare-Menako  as the Acting Chief Compliance 
Officer.		
 y Mr Elikplim Muzzu as the Head of Marketing, Multichannel 
and	Quality;	and	
 y Mrs Dorcas Quaye as the Head of Human Resource 
Management.		
All	the	said	appointments	 were	duly	approved	 by	the	Bank	of	
Ghana 
Mr Charles Tamma the Deputy Head of the Legal Department 
was	nominated	 by	the	Board	of	Directors	 as	the	Acting	Head	of	
the	Department.		 The	Company	 is	seeking	 the	prior	approval	Report of the Directors cont’d
19
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCof the Bank of Ghana pursuant to the Banks and Specialised 
Deposit	 Taking	Institutions	 Act	2016	(Act	930)	which	provides	
that a Bank or Specialised Deposit Taking Institutions shall not 
appoint a person as a Key Management Personnel without the 
prior	written	approval	of	the	Bank	of	Ghana.
Directors’ interest
None of the Directors had a material interest in any contract of 
significance	with	the	Bank	during	the	year.
Interest register
The	Board	of	Directors	 duly	approved	 a	Conﬂict	 of	Interest	
Policy.	 	 The	Directors	 maintain	 an	up-to-date	 register	 for	
documenting	 and	managing	 conﬂict	 of	interest	 situations	 in	
the	Company.		During	the	year	no	interest	was	registered.	
Building the capacity of Directors
The	directors	 in	an	effort	to	build	capacity	 to	facilitate	 the	
discharge of their duties, underwent various forms of training 
during	the	year.	The	areas	of	training	 revolved	 around	
Corporate Governance and Capacity Building with the Ghana 
National	 Banking	 College	on	14		January	 2021	and	21	January	
2021.		The	Directors	 were	also	trained	by	the	Chief	Compliance	
Officer	on	Anti	Money	Laundering	 and	Combatting	 Financing	 of	
Terrorism in line with Bank of Ghana’s Corporate Governance 
Directive	2018.		
Unclaimed dividend
In	accordance	 with	the	Companies	 Act	2019	(Act	992)	any	
unclaimed	 Dividend	 for	a	period	of	3	months	will	be	transferred	
into	an	interest	 bearing	account.	 The	unclaimed	 Dividend	 with	
the	accrued	 interest	thereon	 will	be	transferred	 to	the	Registrar	
General	after	12	months.
Bonus shares
There	has	been	no	proposal	 for	the	issue	of	bonus	shares	during	
the	year	under	review.		
Name change
The name of the company was changed to Societe Generale 
Ghana	 PLC	in	compliance	 with	Section	 21(1)(b)	 of	the	
Companies	 Act	,2019	(Act	992).	The	name	change	 was	duly	
approved	by	the	Bank	of	Ghana.		
Policy on environmental and social management systems  
The Bank has a Policy on Environmental and Social 
Management	 Systems,	 which	was	approved	 by	the	Board	
of	Directors.	 	 It	also	has	an	Environmental	 and	Social	
Management	 Systems	 Charter,	 which	was	duly	approved	 by	
the	Board	of	Directors	 of	the	Bank.		Societe	Generale	 Ghana,	
considers	 that	the	banking	 and	financial	 sector	is	an	essential	
contributor	 to	the	economic	 development.	 Fully	aware	of	its	
role in assisting the economic sphere, Societe Generale Ghana 
is	committed	 to	conducting	 its	activities	 in	a	responsible	 way.	
Taking into account the economic, environmental and social consequences	 and	impacts	 of	its	activities	 is	a	major	focus	of	
the	Bank’s	sustainable	development	policy.
Based	on	continuous	 improvement,	 sustainable	 development	
as	interpreted	 by	Societe	 Generale	 Ghana	draws	on	best	
practices of the Societe Generale Group and the other 
economic	 sectors.	 The	objective	 of	the	Bank	is	to	better	
understand, manage and improve its impacts on society and 
the	environment,	in	conjunction	with	its	stakeholders.
Societe	Generale	 Ghana	has	established	 an	Environmental	 and	
Social	Management	 Systems	 (ESMS)	General	 Guidelines.	 The	
ESMS General Principles stem from the legal and regulatory 
framework	 applicable	 to	the	Bank’s	activities.	 They	are	
implemented through processes and procedures adapted to the 
different	 activities	 of	the	Bank.	The	Guidelines	 outline	the	key	
standards	 and	parameters	 enabling	 a	responsible	 engagement	
of	Societe	Generale	 Ghana	in	all	its	activities.	 They	may	evolve	
in time, according to legislative or regulatory evolutions and 
as	a	result	of	the	discussions	 between	 the	Bank	and	its	various	
stakeholders.	 The	scope	of	these	guidelines	 apply	to	banking	
and	financial	services	provided	by	Societe	Generale	Ghana.
Societe Generale Ghana complies with the Environmental and 
Social laws and regulations in force in Ghana and with the 
applicable	 international	 Environmental	 and	Social	conventions	
and	agreements.	 Societe	 Generale	 Ghana	being	part	of	the	
Societe Generale Group adopts and respects the values and 
principles enshrined in the following international conventions 
and	agreements:
 ythe	Universal	 Declaration	 of	Human	Rights	and	associated	
covenants	 (i.e.	International	 Covenant	 on	Civil	and	Political	
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, 
Social	and	Cultural	Rights);
 ythe	main	Conventions	 of	the	International	 Labour	
Organization;	
 ythe	UNESCO	 Convention	 concerning	 the	Protection	 of	the	
World	Cultural	and	Natural	Heritage;
 ythe	OECD	Guidelines	for	Multinational	Enterprises.
 ythe	UNEP	Finance	Initiative;
 ythe	UN	Global	Compact;
 ythe	Equator	Principles.
Legal	and	regulatory	 obligations	 and	adoption	 of	the	above	
standards and initiatives entail that Societe Generale Ghana 
shall	not	knowingly	 finance	 transactions	 linked	to	certain	
goods	and	services	defined	in	its	policy.	
Corporate Governance Directive by Bank of Ghana
The	Corporate	 Governance	 Directive	 2018	issued	by	the	Bank	of	
Ghana	under	the	powers	conferred	 by	Sections	 56	and	92	of	the	
Banks	and	Specialised	 Deposit	Taking	Institutions	 Act	,2016	(Act	Report of the Directors cont’d
20
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC930)requires Regulated Financial Institutions to adopt sound 
corporate	 governance	 principles	 and	best	practices	 to	enable	
them	under	take	their	licensed	 business	 in	a	sustainable	 manner;	
to promote the interest of depositors and other stakeholders 
by	enhancing	 corporate	 performance	 and	accountability	 of	the	
Regulated	 Financial	 Institutions;	 and	to	promote	 and	maintain	
public	trust	and	confidence	 in	Regulated	 Financial	 Institutions	
by	prescribing	 sound	corporate	 governance	 standards	 which	
are	critical	to	the	proper	functioning	 of	the	banking	 sector	and	
the	economy	as	a	whole.
Sound corporate governance standards
The	Board	of	Directors	 of	the	Bank	have	overall	responsibility	
for the Company including approving and overseeing the 
implementation	 of	the	strategic	 objectives,	 risk	strategy,	
corporate	 governance	 and	corporate	 values.	 The	Board	is	
responsible	 for	appointing	 and	providing	 oversight	 of	Senior	
Management.	 These	responsibilities	 are	set	out	in	the	formal	
Charter	of	the	Board.		The	updated	 Charter	was	duly	approved	
by	members	 on	2	December	 2020.		The	Board	ensures	 that	a	
well-structured	 and	rigorous	 selection	 system	is	in	place	for	
the appointment of Key Management Personnel through the 
Recruitment Policy of the Bank and the Board validates the 
nominations	 of	Key	Management	 Personnel	 prior	to	submitting	
same	to	the	Bank	of	Ghana	for	approval.
Annual certification
In compliance with Bank of Ghana’s Corporate Governance 
Directive	 for	certification	 within	90	days,	at	the	beginning	 of	
each	financial	 year,	the	Board	of	Directors	 of	the	Company	
certify	general	 compliance	 with	the	Directive.	 	 The	Board	
further	certifies	that:
i.	 the Board has independently assessed and documented 
the corporate governance process of the Bank and has 
generally	achieved	its	objectives;
ii.	the	Directors	 are	aware	of	their	responsibilities	 to	the	Bank	
as	persons	charged	with	governance.
iii.	the	Board	further	confirms	 that	it	shall	report	any	material	
deficiencies	 and	weaknesses	 that	have	been	identified	
in the course of the year along with action plans and 
timetables	 for	the	corrective	 action	by	the	Board	to	the	
Bank	of	Ghana.		
iv.	the	Board	of	Directors	 have	received	 training	 by	the	Ghana	
National Banking College on Governance and Directors 
Responsibilities	for	2020.	
Business strategy
The	Board	approves	 and	monitors	 the	overall	business	 strategy	
of	the	Bank	taking	into	account	 long-term	 financial	 interest	 of	
the	company,	 its	exposure	 to	risk	and	its	ability	to	manage	 risk	
effectively.		 The	Board	approves	 and	oversees	 the	formulation	
and	implementation	of	the:- yoverall	risk	strategy,	including	its	risk	tolerance/appetite;
 y policies for risk, risk management and compliance, 
including	 anti-money	 laundering	 and	combating	 the	
financing	of	terrorism	risk;
 yinternal	controls	system;
 y corporate governance framework, principles and 
corporate values including a code of conduct
 y compensation system 
Duty of care and loyalty
The	members	 of	the	Board	exercise	 a	duty	of	care,	duty	of	
loyalty and other duties of Directors to the Company all times 
which	is	stipulated	 in	the	Companies	 Act	,2019(Act	 992)	and	the	
Constitution	of	the	Company.
Corporate culture and values
The	Board	has	established	 a	corporate	 culture	and	values	for	the	
Company	 that	promote	 and	reinforces	 norms	for	responsible	
and	ethical	behaviour	 in	terms	of	the	Bank’s	risk	awareness,	
risk-taking	 and	risk	management.		 The	Company	 has	in	place	a	
Code	of	Conduct;	 a	Conﬂict	 of	Interest	 Policy,	Code	of	Conduct	
on	Anti	Bribery	 and	Corruption	 Policy	duly	approved	 by	the	
Board	of	Directors.
To promote sound corporate culture in the Company, the Board 
has	taken	the	lead	and	established	 the	tone	at	the	top	by	setting	
and adhering to corporate values for itself, key management 
and	employees	 that	create	expectations	 that	business	 should	
be	conducted	 in	a	legal	and	ethical	manner	 at	all	times.	
The Board also ensures that appropriate steps are taken to 
communicate throughout the Company, the corporate values, 
professional standards it sets together with supporting policies 
and	appropriate	sanctions	for	unacceptable	behaviours.
Related party transactions
The Board ensures that transactions with related parties 
including internal group transactions are reviewed to assess 
risk	and	are	subject	 to	appropriate	 restrictions	 by	requiring	
that	such	transactions	 are	conducted	 on	non-preferential	
terms	basis	and	applicable	 legislation	 and	other	requirements	
exposure	limits	for	loans	to	related	parties	and	staff.
Plan for succession
The	Board	has	duly	approved	 a	succession	 plan	and	submitted	
same	to	the	Bank	of	Ghana	for	approval.	 	 The	succession	
plan	focuses	 on	developing	 human	resources	 to	enable	the	
Company	 to	retain	a	pool	of	qualified	 candidates	 who	are	ready	
to	compete	 for	key	positions	 and	areas	when	they	become	
vacant	to	ensure	effective	continuity	of	the	Bank.Report of the Directors cont’d
21
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCKey management oversight
The Board provides oversight of Senior Management as part of 
the	Company’s	checks	and	balances	and	
a.	 monitors and ensure the actions of Senior Management 
through reports from Management  consistent with the 
strategy	 and	policies	approved	 by	the	Board,	including	 the	
risk	tolerance	appetite	and	risk	culture;	
b.	 meets regularly with Senior Management through the 
Board	sub	committees;
c.	 questions and reviews critically explanations and 
information	provided	by	senior	management;
d.	 ensures that the knowledge and expertise of senior 
management remain appropriate given the nature of the 
business	and	the	Bank’s	risk	profile.
e.	 oversees the implementation of appropriate governance 
framework for the Company
f.	 ensures that appropriate succession plans are in place for 
senior	management	positions.
g.	 oversees the design and operation of the Company’s 
compensation system, monitors and reviews the system 
to ensure that it is aligned with the desired risk culture and 
risk appetite of the Company
h.	 approves the overall internal control framework of the 
Company	and	monitor	its	effectiveness
Separation of powers
There	is	a	clear	division	 of	responsibilities	 at	the	top	hierarchy	
of	the	Company.		 The	positions	 of	the	Board	Chair	and	the	
Managing	 Director	 are	separate.	 The	two	top	positions	 of	Board	
Chair	and	Managing	 Director	 in	the	company	 are	not	both	
occupied	 by	foreigners.		 The	Chairman	 is	a	Ghanaian	 National	
and	the	Managing	 Director	 is	a	French	National.		 Further	 no	
two related persons occupy the positions of Board Chair and 
Managing	Director	of	the	Company.	
Independent Directors
The Board is in the process of ensuring and achieving 
convergence	 on	the	positions	 of	Independent	 Directors.			 The	
Board	is	in	the	process	 of	on	boarding	 one	more	Independent	
Non-Executive	 Director	 who	will	chair	the	Risk	Committee.		 The	
final	determination	 of	the	Independence	 of	a	Board	of	Director	
rests	with	the	Bank	of	Ghana.		 However,	 the	Board	of	Directors	
will	ensure	that	an	Independent	 director	 shall	be	non-executive	
and	shall	not:-
a.	 hold cross directorship positions with another director on 
the Board of other institutionsb.	be	a	director	 on	the	Board	of	an	institutional	 shareholder	
with	significant	 equity	interest	 in	the	Regulated	 Financial	
Institution.
c.	have	more	than	5%	equity	interest	 directly	or	indirectly	 in	
the	Company	or	in	its	related	companies;
d.	be	employed	 in	an	executive	 position	 in	the	Company	 or	its	
related	company	 at	least	2	years	prior	to	his	appointment	
date;
e.	have	relatives	 employed	 by	the	Company	 or	any	of	its	
related companies as Key Management Personnel in the 
last	two	(2)	years;
f.	have	engaged	 in	any	transaction	 within	the	last	two	(2)	
years	with	the	Company		on	terms	that	are	less	favourable	
to	the	Company		 than	those	normally	 offered	to	other	
persons;	or
g.	 have served as a director in the Company  continuously for 
more	than	two	(2)	terms	unless	the	director	 can	affirm	that	
his/her	independence	is	not	impaired.
h.	be	related	 to	persons	 with	significant	 shareholding	
in	the	Company	 or	have	any	business	 or	employment	
connections	to	a	significant	shareholder	
Board qualifications and composition
Board	members	 have	the	requisite	 qualification	 as	Directors	
of a leading Financial Institution in Ghana listed on the Ghana 
Stock	Exchange.		 The	National	 Banking	 College	have	trained	the	
Board	of	Directors	 on	Corporate	 Governance.		 The	Board	were	
also trained internally on Compliance, Anti Money Laundering, 
Combatting	 Financing	 of	Terrorism	 and	Anti	Bribery	 and	
Corruption	by	the	Chief	Compliance	Officer	of	the	Bank.
The Board of Directors have a clear understanding of their 
role	in	corporate	 governance	 and	are		able	to	exercise	 sound	
and	objective	 judgment	 about	the	affairs	of	the	Company.	
They possess, individually and collectively, appropriate 
experience, competencies and personal qualities, including 
professionalism	and	integrity.
The	competencies	 of	Boards	are	diverse	to	facilitate	 effective	
oversight	 of	Management	 and	shall	cover	a	blend	of	Banking,	
Law, Finance, Accounting, Economics, Business Administration, 
financial	 analysis,	 Risk	Management,	 Strategic	 planning	 and	
Corporate	 Governance.The	 Board	collectively	 have	reasonable	
knowledge	 and	understanding	 of	local,	regional	 and	global	
economic market forces as well as the legal and regulatory 
environment	 in	which	the	Company	 operates.	 Ghanaian	
nationals,	 ordinarily	 resident	 in	Ghana,	constitute	 at	least	30%	
of	the	Board	composition	of	the	Company.
The Board of Directors are working assiduously to ensure 
that	Independent	 Directors	 constitute	 at	least	30%	of	the	Report of the Directors cont’d
22
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCcomposition	 of	the	Board.	 	 The	Company	 does	not	have	
members	serving	on	its	Board	that	are	Related	Persons.
Board size and structure
As	at	31	December	 2020	the	Board	members	 were	8	including	
the	Chairperson,	 the	majority	 of	which	were	non-executive	 and	
ordinarily	 resident	 in	Ghana.	There	is	an	appropriate	 balance	 of	
power	and	authority	 on	the	Board	between	 the	executive	 and	
non-executive	 directors	 and	no	individual	 or	group	dominates	
the	Board’s	decision-making	process.
Directors’ appointments and Managing Director tenure
The procedure for appointment of directors to the Board is 
formal and transparent and conforms to the Directive issued 
by	the	Bank	of	Ghana	on	fit	and	proper	persons.		 The	Bank	
complies with the Bank of Ghana in respect of the tenure of the 
Managing	Director	of	12	years.
Appointment of key management personnel
The	Bank	ensures	 that	nominations	 are	submitted	 to	the	Bank	
of	Ghana	before	it	appoints	 a	Key	Management	 Personnel	 with	
an enhanced due diligence report on proposed nominees as 
Key	Management	 Personnel.	 The	Bank	also	conducts	 police	
criminal	 background	 checks,	obtains	references	 from	previous	
employers	 and	2	other	reputable	 persons,	 notifies	the	Central	
Bank	about	the	recruitment	 of	Key	Management	 personnel	 and	
obtains	approval.
Alternate Director
The	Bank	does	not	currently	have	any	alternate	directors.
Board Chairman
The	Chair	of	the	Board	is	an	Independent	 Non-executive	
Director	 and	is	ordinarily	 resident	 in	Ghana.	The	Chair	provides	
leadership to the Board and ensures that Board decisions 
are	taken	on	a	sound	and	well-informed	 basis.	The	Chair	
encourages and promotes critical discussion and ensure that dissenting	 views	can	be	expressed	 and	discussed	 within	the	
decision-making	 process.		 The	Chair	encourages	 constructive	
relationship	 within	the	Board	and	between	 the	Board	and	
Management.	 	 She	promotes	 checks	and	balances	 in	the	
governance	 structure	 of	the	Bank.	She	generally	 does	not	serve	
as	a	Chairman	 of	any	of	the	Board	sub	committees.		 The	Bank	
of Ghana approved the appointment of the Board Chair on 15 
September	2020.
The Board Secretary
The	Board	Secretary	 serves	as	an	interface	 between	 the	Board	
and Management and supports the Chairman in ensuring 
the	smooth	 functioning	 of	the	Board.	The	Board	Secretary	
advises the Board on matters relating to statutory duties of the 
directors	 under	the	law,	disclosure	 obligations,	 and	company	
law regulations as well as on matters of corporate governance 
requirements	 and	effective	 Board	processes.	 	 The	Board	
Secretary ensures that directors are provided with complete, 
adequate	and	timely	information	prior	to	Board	meetings.	
Board meetings
The	Company	 holds	a	minimum	 of	four	board	meetings	 annually	
in	February,	 April,	July	and	December.		 It	also	has	one	Annual	
General	 Meeting.	 In	compliance	 with	the	Bank	of	Ghana’s	
Directive	 on	Corporate	 Governance,	 the	Board	hereby	discloses	
the	total	number	 of	Board	meetings	 and	the	attendance	 rate	of	
each	Director	below	which	is	above	50%:
NO NAME 19 FEB 
202022	APR	
202001	JUN	
202016	JUL		
20205	AUG		
20202	DEC		
2020ATTENDANCE
1 Margaret Sekyere yes yes yes yes yes yes 100%
2 Hakim Ouzzani yes yes yes yes yes yes 100%
3 Georges Wega yes yes yes yes yes yes 100%
4Agnes	T.	Giraldi no yes yes yes yes yes 83%
5 Arnaud De Gaudemaris no yes yes yes yes yes 83%
6 Laurette Otchere no yes yes yes yes yes 83%
7 Martine Hitti no yes yes yes yes yes 83%
8 Fosuhene Acheampong n/a n/a n/a yes yes yes 100%
9Francis		Awua-Kyerematen	 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a
n/a		-	Applicable	to	Directors		who	were	undergoing	various	stages	of	approval	during	the	yearReport of the Directors cont’d
23
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCThe	Board	discusses	 the	business	 affairs	of	the	Bank	through	
reports	submitted	by	management	in	writing	as	follows:-
 ya	summary	 of	financial	 statements	 and	performance	
review	against	the	approved	 budget,	 business	 plan,	peers	
and	industry;
 ythe	extent	to	which	the	bank	is	exposed	 to	various	risks	
such as credit, liquidity, interest rate, foreign exchange, 
operational	and	other	risks;
 yreview	of	non-performing	 loans,	related	party	transactions	
and	credit	concentration;
 yactivities	 of	the	Bank	in	the	financial	 market	and	in	its	
“nostro”	accounts;
 yeffectiveness	 of	internal	 control	 systems	 and	human	
resource	issues;
 youtstanding	litigations	and	contingent	liabilities;
 ycompliance	 with	Anti-Money	 Laundering/	 Counter	Financing	 of	Terrorism	 (AML/CFT)	 policies,	 laws	and	
regulations;
 ylist	of	related	party	exposures	and	their	classification.
Other engagements of Directors
The	Board	is	aware	that	to	enable	greater	 commitment	 to	
Board	matters,	 no	director	 should	hold	more	than	five	(5)	
directorship	 positions	 at	a	time	in	both	financial	 and	non-
financial	 companies	 (including	 off-shore	 engagements)	 subject	
to	the	restriction	 against	 concurrent	 directorships	 in	banks	
under	section	58(1)(e)	of	Act	930.	Directors’	 other	engagements	
are	disclosed	below:
Types and duties of outside board and management positions.
Name Nationality Age Position Appointed Profession  & Directorships 
Margaret Sekyere Ghanaian 59 Independent 2019  y Accountant
Hakim Ouzzani French 52 Executive 2016  y Banker
 y SSB Investments Ltd
Lauretta Korkor 
OtchereGhanaian 59Non-executive 2017  y Deputy Director General 
SSNIT
 yTotal	Oil	Co.	Ltd
 y Barrister at Law
 y Human Resource Expert 
Agnes Tauty Giraldi French 55Non-executive 2018  y Banker
 ySG	Managing	Director;	Eu-
rope, Africa, Structured Trade 
Receivables	Finance
Arnaud De 
GaudemarisFrench 45Non-executive 2019  y Banker
 y Director SG Benin
Martine Hitti French 64 Independent 2019  y Retired
Georges Wega Cameroonian 51Non-executive 2019  y Banker
 y Director SG Benin
Fosuhene 
AcheampongGhanaian 57Non-Executive	 2020  y Accountant
 y Director Cedar Seal Company
Francis	Awua-
KyerematenGhanaian 52 Independent 2021  yAccountant-Winchmore	
Capital Ltd
 y Cenit Energy Limited
 yCouncil	for	Technical	&	
Vocational Education and
TrainingReport of the Directors cont’d
24
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCBoard Performance Evaluation
The	Board	carries	out	self-assessment	 of	its	performance	 for	
individual	 Board	members	 in	order	to	review	the	effectiveness	
of	its	own	governance	 practices	 and	procedures	 .The	board	also	
assesses	 Anti-Money	 Laundering	 and	Combatting	 Financing	 of	
Terrorism Training issues to determine where improvements 
may	be	needed	and	make	any	necessary	 changes.		 The	Board	
undertakes a formal and rigorous evaluation of its performance 
with	external	facilitation	of	the	process	every	two	(2)	years.
Report on board evaluation
An	in-house	 performance	 evaluation	 of	the	Board	is	conducted	
annually	 and	a	copy	of	the	results	submitted	 to	the	Bank	of	
Ghana	not	later	than	30	June	of	each	year.
A	separate	 in-house	 performance	 evaluation	 of	the	Board	on	
AML/CFT	 issues	shall	be	submitted	 to	the	Bank	of	Ghana	and	
the	Financial	 Intelligence	 Centre	for	June	and	December	 each	
year	before	the	end	of	the	quarter	 following	 the	evaluation	
period.
A statement on the external evaluation of the Board is included 
in	the	annual	report	of	the	Bank.		A	detailed	 copy	of	the	report	
was	submitted	 to	the	Bank	of	Ghana.		 This	will	be	undertaken	
once	every	two	years.
Statement on the external board evaluation
An external Board evaluation was conducted on the Board 
of Societe Generale Ghana to review the competence of the 
collective	 Board	and	of	individual	 members	 to	ensure	the	
Board	has	the	right	mix	of	skills,	capabilities	 and	experience	 to	
deliver	the	right	outcomes,	 meet	its	responsibilities,	 explores	
strategies	 for	improvement	 and	decides	on	actions	to	be	taken.		
The	evaluation	 was	done	based	on	the	quality	of	the	Board	and	
consists	of:
 yensuring	 the	board	is	consisted	 of	individuals	 of	sufficient	
calibre	to	run	the	institution.	
 yStrategy:	 ensuring	 that	the	board	collectively	 defines	the	
strategic	 direction	 and	objectives	 for	the	firm	and,	that	
the	strategic	 direction	 of	the	firm	is	effectively	 cascaded	
downwards.	
 yBoard	Structure	 and	Composition:	 ensuring	 that	the	
board	is	composed	 of	the	right	calibre	of	people	(requisite	
knowledge	 and	experience)	 to	ensure	 effective	 and	
independent	 oversight	 while	minimizing	 conﬂict	 of	
interest.	
 yBoard	Operations:		 ensuring	 that	the	board	performs	 its	
oversight	 with	respect	to	finance,	 strategy,	 risk	and	policy	
formulation.	
 yBoard	Risk	Management	 Activities:	 ensuring	 the	board	
performs active monitoring and strengthening of internal 
audit, internal control, compliance and risk management 
functions.	 yRelationship	 with	Stakeholders:	 ensuring	 the	board	
actively	represents	and	engages	with	all	stakeholders.	
 yTransparency	 and	Disclosure:	 ensuring	 that	the	Board	
maintains transparency in dealing with its stakeholders 
and	meeting	its	regulatory	disclosure	requirements.	
The	evaluation	 of	SG	Ghana’s	 Board	considered	 applicable	
regulatory	 requirements.	 The	process	 comprised	 of	review	of	
relevant	 SG	Ghana	documents;	 online	survey	of	2018	and	2019	
Board	members;	 one-on-one	 interviews	 with	cross-section	 of	
Board	members;	 benchmarking	 of	the	Board’s	maturity	 against	
the	External	appraisers	Board	Maturity	Framework.
The	findings	 revealed	 that	on	Transparency	 and	Disclosure	
the	Board	was	advanced;	 The	Board	was	considered	 to	be	
established	 in	relation	 to	the	quality	of	the	Board,	its	strategy,	
Operations,	 Risk	Management,	 and	Relations	 with	Stakeholders.	
The	board	was	however	 developing	 in	terms	of	its	Structure	
and	composition.	 An	action	plan	was	put	in	place	to	implement	
the recommendation of the external Board appraisal and the 
implementation	 rate	is	82.75%.		 Implementation	 is	ongoing	 to	
achieve	100%	of	the	recommendations.
The Securities and Exchange Commission Ghana (“SEC”) 
Corporate Governance Code 2020
The	SEC	Ghana	issued	a	Corporate	 Governance	 Code	on	8	
October	 2020.	The	Code	applies	 to	all	companies	 whose	
securities	 are	listed	on	the	Ghana	Stock	Exchange	 (“GSE”).		
Societe Generale Ghana PLC a company that is listed on the 
GSE,	has	to	comply	with	the	Code	by	October	 2021.		With	the	
implementation of the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance 
Directive	 2018,	the	Bank	is	already	compliant	 with	most	of	the	
sections	 of	the	SEC	Code.		However,	 the	Board	Charter	will	have	
to	be	updated	 and	published	 on	the	Banks	website.		 The	role	
and	responsibilities	 of	the	Board	as	spelt	out	in	the	Code	shall	
be	described	 in	a	Board	Charter.	 The	Board	appointments	 policy	
and	remuneration	policy	shall	also	be	in	the	Board	Charter.
A	majority	 of	non-executive	 directors	 shall	be	independent.	
The	Board	shall	reﬂect	the	company’s	 broad	shareholding	
structure.	 	 The	Board	shall	identify	 one	independent	 non-
executive	 director	 who	shall	be	responsible	 for	relations	 with	
minority	shareholders.	
No person shall hold more than 3 directorships in any listed 
company	 at	any	one	time.		All	directors	 shall	be	required	 to	
submit	themselves	 for	re-election.	 The	Board	shall	adopt	a	
clear succession plan for its Chairman and Chief Executive 
Officer	and	other	senior	executive	 officers.	 	 Independent	
Non-Executive	 Directors	 shall	be	required	 to	chair	all	Board	
Committees.		 The	Chairman	 of	the	Audit	Committee	 shall	be	a	
Chartered	Accountant.
The	Board	shall	appoint	 a	person	 with	responsibility	 for	
relations	 with	investors.	 This	person	shall	have	the	resources	
necessary	 to	fulfil	his/her	 function.	 The	investor	 relations	
officer	may	have	other	duties.	The	investor	 relations	 officer	Report of the Directors cont’d
25
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCshall	be	the	first	point	of	contact	 between	 investors	 and	the	
company.	 He	or	she	shall	be	responsible	 for	providing	 financial	
and	non-financial	 information	 to	investors,	 financial	 analysts	
and	their	representatives	 in	a	timely	and	accurate	 way.	The	
investor	 relations	 officer	shall	also	be	responsible	 for	reporting	
investor concerns to the Board and ensuring that the statutory 
provisions as well as the provisions stipulated in SEC Corporate 
Governance Code, regarding communications with investors 
and	shareholders,	are	met.	
Board sub-committees
The	Board	has	in	place	an	Audit	&	Accounts	 Committee,	 a	Risk	
Committee,	 a	Nomination	 &	Compensation	 Committee,	 a	Cyber	
and Information Security Committee and an Independent 
Directors	Committee.	
The	Chief	Risk	Officer,	the	Acting	Chief	Compliance	 Officer	and	
the Head of Internal Audit report directly to the Board via the 
Board	sub	committees	and	the	Managing	Director.
Conflicts of interest
The	Board	has	in	place	a	Conﬂict	 of	Interest	 Policy	which	
includes:	-
 ythe	duty	of	the	director	 to	avoid	possible	 activities	 that	
could	create	conﬂicts	of	interest;
 ya	review	or	approval	 process	 for	directors	 to	follow	before	
they engage in certain activity so as to ensure that such 
activity	will	not	create	a	conﬂict	of	interest;
 y the duty of the director to disclose any matter that may 
result,	or	has	already	resulted	in	a	conﬂict	of	interest;
 ythe	responsibility	 of	the	director	 to	abstain	 from	voting	
as	prescribed		 and	on	any	matter	where	the	director	 may	
have	conﬂict	of	interest;
 y adequate procedures for transactions with related parties 
to	be	made	on	a	non-preferential	 basis;	and	the	way	in	
which	the	Board	will	deal	with	any	non-compliance	 with	
the	policy.
The	Conﬂict	 of	Interest	 Policy	was	approved	 by	the	Board	of	
Directors.	 	 The	Board	maintains	 an	up-to-date	 register	 for	
documenting	 and	managing	 conﬂict	 of	interest	 situations	 in 
the	Company.
Group structures
The Board of SG Financial Services Holding Company shall 
have	the	ultimate	 responsibility	 for	the	adequate	 corporate	
governance	 across	the	Group.	The	Board	shall	ensure	that	
there are governance policies and mechanisms appropriate to 
the	structure,	 business	 and	risk	of	the	group	and	its	entities.		
The Board of Directors in addition to the Bank of Ghana 
Corporate	 Governance	 Directive	 of	December	 2018	utilizes	the	
SG	Group	Corporate	 Governance	 Principles	 Instruction	 01422	
VI	EN	applicable	 to	Group	entities	 as	at	2018	and	the	Societe	Generale Code Book ‘A on Governance and Organisational 
Principles’	 which	was	published	 for	all	entities	under	the	group	
in	May	2020.
Senior management duties
Under	the	direction	 of	the	Board,	Senior	Management	 ensures	 -
 y that the activities of the Banking Institution are consistent 
with	the	business	 strategy,	 risk	tolerance/appetite	 and	
policies	approved	by	the	Board.
 ythat	it	establishes	 a	management	 structure	 that	promotes	
accountability	and	transparency
 y the implementation of  appropriate systems for managing 
risks	both	financial	 and	non-financial		 to	which	the	Bank	
is	exposed.
 ythat	they	engage	skilled	and	competent	 staff	and	provide	
training and development opportunities to sustain the 
delivery	 of	short	and	long	term	business	 objectives,	 the	
risk management framework and protect the reputation 
of	the	Bank.
Risk management and internal controls
The	Board	ensures	 that	the	Bank	has	effective	 internal	 controls	
systems and a risk management function including a Chief 
Risk	Officer	with	sufficient	 authority,	 stature,	 independence,	
resources	and	access	to	the	Board.
Risk management function
The	Board	has	in	place	a	risk	management	 function	 responsible	
for:
 y identifying key risks to the Bank, 
 y assessing those risks and the Bank’s exposure to the 
identified	risks;	
 y monitoring the risk exposures and determining the 
corresponding	capital	needs	on	an	ongoing	basis;
 y monitoring and assessing decisions to accept particular 
risks, risk mitigation measures and if the  risk decisions 
are	in	line	with	the	Board	approved	 risk	tolerance/appetite 
and	risk	policy;	
 ysubmitting	 risk	management	 reports	 to	Senior	
Management	and	the	Board.
Chief risk officer
The	Company	 has	a	Chief	Risk	Officer	who	is	an	independent	
Key Management Personnel and who has no involvement in the 
operations	 of	the	bank	with	distinct	 responsibility	 for	the	risk	
management function and the comprehensive risk management 
framework	 of	the	bank	across	the	entire	organization.	 The	
independence	 of	the	Chief	Risk	Officer	is	distinct	 from	other	
executive	 functions	 and	business	 line	responsibilities.	 The	Report of the Directors cont’d
26
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCChief	Risk	Officer	reports	to	the	Board	via	the	Risk	Committee	
with	a	functional	 report	line	to	the	Managing	 Director.		 He	has	
unfettered	 reporting	 access	to	Board	and	its	Risk	committee.	
Interaction	 between	 the	Board	Risk	Committee	 and	the	Chief	
Risk	Officer	is	regular	and	comprehensively	documented.
Internal controls
Internal controls within the Bank are designed to ensure that 
each key risk has a policy, process or other measure, as well as 
a control to ensure that such policy, process or other measure 
is	being	applied	 and	works	as	intended.	 Internal	 controls	 help	
provide	 comfort	 that	financial	 and	management	 information	
is	reliable,	 timely	and	complete	 and	that	the	Bank	is	in	
compliance	 with	its	various	obligations,	 including	 applicable	
laws	and	regulations.
Head internal audit
The Bank has a Head, Internal Audit who is an independent Key 
Management Personnel and has no involvement in the audited 
activities	 and	business	 line	responsibilities	 of	the	Bank.		The	
Head Internal Audit is competent to examine all areas in which 
the	Bank	operates	and:
 y has the professional competence to collect and analyze 
financial	 information	 as	well	as	evaluate	 audit	evidence	
and to communicate with the stakeholders of the internal 
audit	function;	 possess	 sufficient	 knowledge	 of	auditing	
techniques	and	methodologies;
 yis	a	member	of	a	relevant	recognized	professional	body;
The	Head	of	Internal	 Audit	reports	to	the	Board	sub-committee	
on audit and has direct access to the Board and its audit 
committee.	 Interaction	 between	 the	Board	Audit	Committee	
and the Internal Audit is regular and comprehensively 
documented.
Group-wide and bank-wide risk management
Risks	in	the	Bank	are	identified	 and	monitored	 on	an	on-going	
group-wide	 and	bank-wide	 basis.	The	sophistication	 of	the	risk	
management	 and	internal	 control	infrastructure	 -	including,	
in	particular,	 a	sufficiently	 robust	information	 technology	
infrastructure	keeps	pace	with	developments.
Risk management in subsidiary Banks
The	Board	and	Senior	Management	 of	parent	banks	or	financial	
holding	 companies	 conducts	 strategic,	 group-wide	 risk	
management	 and	prescribe	 group	risk	policies.	 The	Board	and	
Senior Management of the Bank make appropriate input into 
the	group-wide	 risk	management	 policies	 and	assessments	 of	
local	risks.	Adequate	 stress-testing	 of	the	subsidiary	 portfolios	is	done	based	on	both	the	economic	 and	operating	 environment	
of	the	subsidiary	 and	on	potential	 stress	of	the	parent	bank	
or	Financial	 Holding	 Company.	 The	results	of	stress	tests	and	
other	risk	management	 reports	shall	be	communicated	 to	the	
Board	and	Senior	Management.
Internal and External Audit Functions
The	Board	and	Senior	Management	 effectively	 utilize	the	work	
conducted	 by	the	internal	 audit	functions,	 external	 auditors	
and	internal	 control	 functions.	 The	Board	recognizes	 and	
acknowledges	 that	independent,	 competent	 and	qualified	
internal and external auditors, as well as other internal control 
functions, are vital to the corporate governance process and 
engage	 the	auditors	 to	judge	the	effectiveness	 of	the	risk	
management	function	and	the	compliance	function.	
Compensation system 
Where share options are adopted as part of executive 
remuneration	 or	compensation,	 it	shall	be	tied	to	performance	
and	subject	 to	shareholders’	 approval	 at	an	annual	general	
meeting.		 The	Bank	has	disclosed	 in	the	details,	the	number	 of	
shares	held	by	the	top	20	Shareholders.		
The Bank’s corporate structure
The Board and Senior Management understand the structure 
and	the	organization	 of	the	group	and	the	Bank.	The	Board	
actively oversees the design and operation of the compensation 
system.	 The	Board	monitors	 and	reviews	 the	compensation	
system	to	ensure	that	it	is	effectively	aligned	to	ensure
 yprudent	risk	taking;	
 ylevels	of	remuneration	 are	sufficient	 to	attract,	 retain	
and	motivate	 executive	 officers	 of	the	bank	and	this	is	
balanced	 against	 the	interest	 of	the	bank	in	not	paying	
excessive	remuneration;	
 ywhere	remuneration	 is	tied	to	performance,	 it	shall	be	
designed	in	such	a	way	as	to	prevent	excessive	risk	taking;
Executive directors are not entitled to sitting allowances and 
directors’	 fees;	Non-executive	 directors’	 remuneration	 shall	be	
limited to directors’ fees and sitting allowances for Board and 
Committee	meetings	are	not	performance	related.
Disclosure and Transparency
The	bank	has	submitted	 a	list	of	its	significant	 shareholders,	
directors	 and	Key	Management	 personnel	 as	at	31	of	December	
to	the	Bank	of	Ghana	by	15	January	 of	the	following	 year.	Below	
is	the	Corporate	Structure	of	the	Bank.Report of the Directors cont’d
27
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCCORPORATE STRUCTURE
Nomination	&	Compensation	
CommitteeBoard of Directors
Managing Director
Hakim	OUZZANICyber	and	Information	
Security Committee
Audit	&	Accounts
Committee
Audit
Frank LAWOE
Chief	Compliance	Officer
Abena	ASARE-MENAKO	(Designate)Independent Directors 
Committee
Executive Committee
Assets and Liabilities Committee Risk Committee
Chief	Risk	Officer
Kwame ANTERKYI
Executive Assistant
Anna MENSAH
Company Secretary
Angela	N.	BONSUAdviser to MD
(Vacant)
Purchasing
Samuel AKOTOHuman Resource Management
Dorcas	QUAYE
Chief	Finance	Officer
Felix	ADJAKU
Deputy Managing Director
Francois	POUSSEChief	Operating	Officer
Bernice ALLOTEY
Organisation	and	Projects
Adwoa Asieduaa NTIRAKWACentral	Back	Office
Connor GWIRA
Cards Business
(Vacant)
Logistics
Lawrence RIBEIRO
Security
Baba	Mubarak	AHMADUInformation Systems Technology
Abigail	ALLOTEY
Cyber	Information	Security	Officer	
Francis Amanor TEYECorporate Coverage
Fred	OBOSUTreasury
Catherine	JOHNSON
Structured Finance
Edward ABOAGYE
KYC
Lydia DANKWAHRetail Business
Obed	HOYAH
Marketing,	Multi	Channel	&	Quality	
Elikplim	MUZZUSHAREHOLDERS
28
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCEthics and professionalism
The Bank has in place a Code of Conduct which was duly 
approved	 by	the	Board	of	Directors.		 The	Code	of	Conduct	
has	been	made	available	 to	the	Board	of	Directors	 and	all	
Employees.	 The	Code	shall	be	reviewed	 regularly	 and	when	
necessary.	 	 It	contains	 practices	 necessary	 to	maintain	
confidence	 in	the	integrity	 of	the	Bank	and	commit	 the	Bank,	
its	staff,	management	 and	the	Board	to	the	highest	standards	
of	professional	 behaviour,	 business	 conduct	 and	sustainable	
banking	 practices.		 It	has	been	approved	 by	the	Board	and	
signed	off	by	employees	 that	they	understand	 the	code	and	
sanctions	for	breaching	the	policy.		
Cooling-off period
The	Bank	will	respect	the	Cooling	 Off	period	under	the	Bank	of	
Ghana	Corporate	 Governance	 Directive	 2018	which	stipulates	
that	former	 Bank	of	Ghana	officers,	 directors	 or	senior	
executives	 shall	not	be	eligible	for	appointment	 as	a	director	
of	the	Bank	until	after	a	period	of	two	(2)	years	following	 the	
expiration or termination of their contract of employment or 
service	from	the	Bank	of	Ghana.		A	practicing	 audit	professional	
or partner who is rendering services or had rendered auditing 
services	 in	the	banking	 industry	 shall	not	be	appointed	 as	a	
director	 of	the	bank	until	one	(1)	year	has	elapsed	 since	last	
engagement	with	any	Bank	by	that	person.
A code of ethics for all company employees
Societe	Generale	 Ghana	has	a	Code	of	Ethics	for	staff	and	this	
has	been	made	available	to	all	employees	of	the	Bank.	
Code of ethics for the board and waivers to the ethics code
The Regulations of the Bank provides for ethics for the Board 
and	provides	 that	the	Directors	 stand	in	a	fiduciary	 relationship	
towards	 the	Company	 in	any	transaction	 with	it	or	on	its	behalf.		
A	Director	 shall	act	at	all	times	in	what	he	or	she	believes	 to	
be	in	the	best	interests	 of	the	Company	 as	a	whole	so	as	to	
preserve	 its	assets,	further	 its	business,	 and	promote	 the	
purposes for which it was formed, and in such manner as a 
faithful, diligent, careful and ordinarily skilful Director would 
act	in	the	circumstances.	 In	considering	 whether	 a	particular	
transaction	 or	course	of	action	is	in	the	best	interests	 of	the	
Company as a whole a Director may have regard to the interests 
of	the	employees,	 as	well	as	the	members,	 of	the	Company,	
and,	when	appointed	 by,	or	as	representative	 of,	a	special	class	
of	members,	 employees,	 or	creditors	 may	give	special,	 but	not	
exclusive,	consideration	to	the	interests	of	that	class.
Performance evaluation process.
The Board has in place an evaluation process which covers 
the	functions	 of	the	Board;	Board	meetings	 management	
and	procedures;	 Appointment,	 Induction,	 Training	 and	
Development;	 Succession	 and	Removal;	 Board	Structure;	
Information	 and	Communication.	 An	evaluation	 was	
undertaken	during	the	Reporting	Period.	
Role and functions of the Board of Directors and committees 
of the Board.
The main task of the Board of Directors is to make sure that 
the	Bank’s	operations	 comply	 with	the	relevant	 applicable	
regulations	 and	with	the	strategy	 defined.		 In	this	capacity,	 it	
must:	 ydefine	and	follow	up	the	implementation	 of	the	Bank’s	
strategic	 orientations	 while	making	 sure	its	business	 is	
developing	in	the	proper	conditions	of	security;	
 ycheck	and	approve	 management	 by	relying	on	the	work	of	
the reporting committees from which it regularly receives 
information and to which it may assign tasks where 
necessary 
 yappoint,	 according	 to	applicable	 local	rules,	the	Bank’s	
Representatives who shall manage the Bank,
 ymake	sure	the	information	 given	to	the	banking	 and	market	
authorities	 and	to	shareholders	 is	reliable.	 Therefore,	 it	
draws	up	the	financial	 statements	 then	presents	 them	to	
the	shareholders’	meeting	for	approval.
 yit	must	assess	the	way	it	operates	annually.	
There	are	five	reporting	 Committees	 responsible	 for	supporting	
the	Board	of	Directors,	 which	are	the	Risk	Committee;	 the	
Audit	and	Accounts	 Committee;	 and	the	Nomination	 and	
Compensation	 Committee;	 the	Cyber	and	Information	 Security	
Committee	and	Independent	Directors	Committee.
Independence of the Board of Directors.
The Bank is committed to achieving the highest standards 
of	corporate	 governance,	 corporate	 responsibility	 and	risk	
management	 when	conducting	 its	business.	 The	Bank	ensures	
that	it	conducts	 its	business	 activities	 in	accordance	 with	all	
laws	and	regulations,	 which	govern	its	business	 activities.	 The	
Board	of	Directors	 are	responsible	 for	ensuring	 that	Societe	
Generale Ghana achieves and maintains a high standard of 
corporate	governance	and	practices.
The	Bank	has	an	eight-member	 Board	comprising	 one	executive	
director;	 two	Independent	 Directors	 and	five	non-executive	
directors.	 The	Board	consists	 of	highly	qualified	 individuals	 with	
diverse	professional	 experiences:			 The	core	role	of	the	Board	is	
to	promote	 the	success	of	the	Bank	by	providing	 direction	 and	
supervision	in	the	Bank’s	affairs.	Among	other	roles,	the	Board:	
 y provides leadership to the Bank within a framework of 
prudent	 and	effective	 controls	 which	enable	risks	to	be	
assessed	and	managed;
 yprovides	 input	into	the	development	 of	the	long-term	
objectives	 and	overall	commercial	 strategy	 for	the	Bank	
and	is	responsible	 for	the	oversight	 of	the	Bank’s	operations	
while evaluating and directing the implementation of the 
Bank’s	controls	and	procedures;
 y provides oversight of the Bank’s strategic aims, ensuring 
that	the	necessary	 financial	 and	human	 resources	 are	
in	place	for	the	Bank	to	meet	its	objectives,	 as	well	as	
reviewing	management	performance;
 y upholds the Bank’s values and standards and ensures that 
its	obligations	 to	its	shareholders	 and	other	stakeholders	
are	understood	and	met;	andReport of the Directors cont’d
29
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC yensures	 timely	and	accurate	 financial	 reporting	 to	
shareholders.
Remuneration and other benefits of Directors
Section	 185(1)	of	the	Companies	 Act	,2019	(Act	992)	provides	
that the fees and other remuneration including remuneration 
payable	 to	the	directors	 in	whatsoever	 capacity	 shall	be	
determined	 from	time	to	time	by	ordinary	 resolution	 of	the	
company	 and	not	by	any	provisions	 in	an	agreement.	 Section	
78(3)	of	the	Regulations	 of	the	Company	 provides	 that	fees	
payable	 to	Directors	 shall	not	be	increased	 except	pursuant	
to an ordinary resolution passed at a General Meeting, where 
notice	of	the	proposed	 increase	 has	been	given	in	the	Notice	
convening	 the	meeting.		 Collectively,	 the	Directors	 at	the	Board	
meeting preceding the Annual General Meeting agree their fees 
and	this	is	then	placed	before	the	Shareholders	 of	the	Bank	
through	an	ordinary	resolution	at	the	Annual	General	Meeting.		
Checks and balances mechanisms balancing the power of 
the CEO with the power of the Board.
The Constitution of the Company provide that the Board of 
Directors	 may	from	time	to	time	appoint	 one	of	their	body	
to	the	office	of	Managing	 Director.	 The	person	shall	be	the	
Chief	Executive,	 for	such	period	and	on	such	terms	as	may	be	
determined	 and,	subject	to	the	terms	of	any	agreement	 entered	
into in any particular case, may revoke such appointment and 
such	appointment	 shall	be	automatically	 determined	 if	the	
holder	of	the	office	ceases	from	any	cause	to	be	a	Director.
Subject	 to	any	directives	 of	the	Board	on	matters	 of	general	
policy,	the	Managing	 Director	 shall	be	responsible	 for	the	
directions	 of	the	day-to-day	 business	 of	the	Bank	and	for	its	
administration.	
If	the	Managing	 Director	 is	absent	from	Ghana	or	is	otherwise	
incapacitated	 from	performing	 duties	of	the	office,	the	Board	
may authorise an employee of the Bank to exercise, for the time 
being,	all	the	duties	and	powers	of	the	Managing	Director.
The Directors may entrust to and confer upon a Managing 
Director	 any	of	the	powers	exercisable	 by	them	upon	such	terms	
and	with	such	restrictions	 as	they	think	fit.	Either	collaterally	
with,	or	to	the	exclusion	 of,	their	own	powers	and	subject	to	
the terms of any agreement entered into in any particular case, 
may	from	time	to	time	revoke	or	vary	all	or	any	of	such	powers.
Process for appointment of external auditors
Section	 81	of	the	Banks	and	Specialized	 Deposit	 Taking	
Institutions	 Act,	2016	(Act	930)	vests	the	shareholders	 of	a	bank	
with the power to appoint the external auditors at an Annual 
General	 Meeting	 and	be	approved	 by	the	Bank	of	Ghana	in	the	
manner	and	on	the	terms	as	may	be	described.		
Process for interaction with external auditors
The	Board	of	Directors	 on	an	annual	basis	invite	the	external	
auditors of the company to a meeting for an Independent 
Auditors Report on the Audited Financial Statements of the 
Company.	 The	external	 auditors	 of	the	company	 explain	 to	
the Board the completion of the audit on the company which 
is	undertaken	 in	accordance	 with	international	 standards.		
They	usually	state	that	the	audit	is	conducted	 to	enable	the	
external	 auditors	 form	an	opinion	 on	the	financial	 statements	that	have	been	prepared	 by	management	 with	oversight	 of	the	
Board	of	Directors.		 They	further	explain	to	the	Board	that	the	
audit	of	the	financial	 statements	 does	not	relieve	management	
or	the	Board	of	their	responsibilities.		 The	auditors	 draw	the	
Board’s	 attention	 to	any	matters	 identified	 during	the	audit	
of	the	financial	 statements	 of	the	company.	 	 The	auditors	
obtain	Management’s	 Responses	 to	any	matter(s)	 and	draw	
the	Board’s	 attention	 to	any	areas	of	concern.	 At	the	meeting	
the External Auditors Report on the Financial Statements, 
the	Directors	 Responsibility	 for	the	Financial	 Statement,	 the	
Auditors	 Responsibility,	 Opinion	 and	Report	on	other	legal	and	
regulatory	requirements.		
  
Duration of current auditors
Messrs	Ernst	&	Young	were	appointed	 as	Auditors	 of	Societe	
Generale	 Ghana	PLC	on	31	March	2017	during	the	Bank’s	
Annual	General	 Meeting.	 Thus,	they	are	in	their	fifth	year	of	
providing	 auditing	 services	 to	the	bank.		They	were	appointed	
in accordance with Section 134(5) of the Companies Code, 
1963	(Act	179)	as	amended,	 which	has	now	been	repealed	 and	
replaced	 with	the	Companies	 Act,	2019	(Act	992)	and	Section	
54(2)	(d)	of	the	Regulations	of	the	Bank.	
Auditors’ involvement in non-audit work and the fees paid 
to the auditors
Apart from the audit assignment, Ernst and Young were not 
engaged	 by	the	bank	to	undertake	 any	non-audit	 work	during	
the	year.
Auditors remuneration
In	accordance	 with	Section	140	of	the	Companies	 Act,	2019	(Act	
992)	Messrs.’	Ernst	&	Young	the	Company’s	 auditors	 have	agreed	
to	continue	 in	office	as	the	Bank’s	auditors.		 A	Resolution	 to	
authorize the Directors to determine their remuneration for the 
year	ended	31	December	 2020	will	be	proposed	 at	the	Annual	
General	Meeting.
Stated capital of the bank
The	stated	capital	of	the	Bank	is	GH¢	404,245,427
Substantial shareholders
Details of the Bank’s twenty largest shareholders are disclosed 
in	note	43	to	the	financial	statements.
Risk committee
In line with its Corporate Governance principles, the Board 
of Directors has a Risk Committee made up of the following 
directors:		
1.	 Hakim Ouzzani
2.	 Margaret Boateng Sekyere
3.	 Georges Wega
4.	 Agnes Tauty Giraldi
5.	 Laurette Otchere
6.	 Fosuhene Acheampong
Mrs	Margaret	 Boateng	 Sekyere	 will	step	down	as	a	member	 of	
the Risk Committee once an Indpendent Non Executive Director 
is	appointed	to	Chair	the	Risk	Committee.Report of the Directors cont’d
30
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCThe	Risk	Committee		has	the	following	functions.	It
 yanalyses	on	a	periodical	basis	the	organisation	and	
functioning	of	the	Bank’s	risks	departments.
 y reviews the portfolio of credit and market risks to which 
the	Bank	is	exposed.
As regards counterparty risks, the Risk Committee shall review 
the	following:-
 y the content of and changes to the portfolio per type 
of	facility	and	debtor,
 y the regulatory ratios and key indicators,
 ychanges	to	the	quality	of	commitments:	sensitive,	
irregular,	non-performing	files,	
 y compliance with the conditional authorizations 
issued	by	the	Societe	Generale,	etc.
 y adequacy of the level of provision for the risks 
incurred,
 ythe	efficiency	of	debt	collection,
 yreports	to	the	Board	of	Directors	on	its	work.
The	Committee	 reports	its	findings	 to	the	Board	of	Directors	
with	the	requisite	 recommendations.	 In	attendance	 at	Risk	
Committee meetings are the Deputy Managing Director, Chief 
Operating	 Officer,	Chief	Risk	Officer;	Head	of	Audit	Department;	
Chief	Finance	 Officer;	General	Manager	 Corporate	 Coverage;	 the	
Chief	Compliance	 Officer;	and	the	Head	of	Permanent	 Control.		
The	Risk	Committee	operates	under	a	Charter.	
Audit and accounts committee 
In line with its Corporate Governance principles, the Board of 
Directors has an Audit and Accounts Committee made up of 
the	following	non-executive	directors:
1.	 Arnaud De Gaudemaris
2.	 Martine Hitti
3.	 Laurette Otchere
4.	 Fosuhene Acheampong
This Committee reviews and makes recommendations to 
the	Board	on	all	aspects	 of	the	audit	and	financial	 reporting	
processes.	 In	attendance	 at	Audit	and	Accounts	 Committee	
meetings are the Managing Director, Deputy Managing Director, 
Chief	Operating	 Officer,	Head	of	Audit	Department,	 Head	of	
Permanent Control Department and where necessary, the 
Bank’s	External	Auditors.	
The audit and accounts committee:
 yKeeps	up-to-date	 with	changes	 in	the	legal	and	regulatory	
environment	 affecting	 the	work	the	committee	 monitors	
for	proper	execution.
 yReviews	 and	validates	 the	accounts	 of	the	bank	and	the	work of the External Auditors
 y periodically gives an opinion of the organisation and 
functioning of the Bank’s periodic and permanent internal 
control.	 Suggests	 to	the	Board	of	Directors	 the	relevant	
adaptations, monitors the implementation of these 
measures and reports on their application to the Board of 
Directors.
 y validates, in consultation with the Groups relevant 
Departments the Audit Plan of the Bank while making sure 
that	the	development	 method	 enables	 the	areas	of	risk	to	
be	properly	detected	and	covered.
 y follows up the implementation of the Audit Plan and 
proposes	adjustments	if	necessary.
 yreviews	the	work	done	by	Periodic	 and	Permanent	 Control:
 y reports to the Board of Directors on any anomalies 
and gives its opinion of the relevance of the corrective 
measures	chosen	by	the	Bank’s	Management,
 y Monitors the implementation, according to the deadlines 
set, of the critical periodic control recommendations as 
well	as	the	solving	of	the	critical	points	identified,
 y informs the Board of Directors of any discrepancies in the 
critical and priority corrective measures (failures exposing 
the entity to a high risk) 
 yreviews	 the	procedures	 and	the	functioning	 of	the	anti-
money	laundering	 and	terrorism	 financing	 systems,	 and	
the	compliance	risk	control.
 ysubmits	 to	the	Board	of	Directors	 the	measures	 likely	to	
improve,	 where	applicable,	 the	security	 of	operations,	 and	
monitors	the	implementation	of	the	selected	measures.
 yis	generally	 informed	 by	Management	 of	any	event	
occurring in the operation of the Bank which is likely to 
adversely	affect	its	control	of	risks.
The	list	of	issues	to	be	addressed	 at	the	Audit	and	Accounts	
Committee meetings are formalised in the Audit and Accounts 
Committee	 File;	comprising	 Periodic	 Control	 Reports;	
Permanent Control Reports, Compliance Reports, Anti Money 
Laundering	 and	Combatting	 Financing	 of	Terrorism	 Reports	 to	
the Audit and Accounts Committee and discussed according to 
the	Agenda.
Nomination and compensation committee
In line with its Corporate Governance principles the Board of 
Directors has a Nomination and Compensation committee 
made	up	of	the	following	directors:	
1.	 Laurette Otchere  
2.	 Hakim Ouzzani    
3.	 Georges Wega    
4.	 Margaret Boateng Sekyere
This	Committee	 ensures	 the	bank	has	a	board	of	competent	
and	effective	 composition	 and	is	adequately	 charged	 to	carry	
out	its	responsibility	 in	the	best	interest	 of	the	bank	and	its	Report of the Directors cont’d
31
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCshareholders.	
The following are the elements that may come under its scope 
and	authority:-
 y The Bank’s general wage policy
 y The detailed salaries of the Bank’s senior executives and 
Key Management Personnel
 yChanges	in	social	liabilities	and	Health	Insurance	for	Staff
 yAdministrators	and	Company	Managers	pay.
The	Nomination	 &	Compensation	 Committee	 does	not	
however have authority to make decisions on these issues and 
has	a	purely	advisory	 capacity;	 therefore,	 it	may	only	formulate	
opinions	and	recommendations	to	the	Board	of	Directors.		
Cyber and information security committee
In line with its Corporate Governance principles and Bank 
of	Ghana’s	 Directive,	 the	Board	of	Directors	 has	a	Cyber	and	
Information Security Committee made up of the following 
directors:
1.	 Martine Hitti
2.	 Hakim Ouzzani
3.	 Fosuhene Acheampong
Independent directors committee
In line with its Corporate Governance principles, the Board 
of	Directors	 has	an	Independent	 Directors	 Committee.		 The	
purpose of the Committee is to determine the remuneration of 
Executive	 Directors.		 The	Committee	 is	made	up	of	the	following	
Directors:-
1.	 Margaret Boateng Sekyere
2.	 Martine HittiCompliance with securities and exchange commission 
regulations
The Bank has complied with the regulations of the Securities 
and	Exchange	 Commission	 (L.I.	1728	Regulation	 61)	and	has	
submitted	 to	the	Commission	 as	requested,	 two	(2)	reports	of	
the	Audit	and	Accounts	 Committee	 for	the	year	2020.	The	Audit	
Committee	 held	three	meetings	 during	the	year	under	review.		
In	fulfilment	 of	the	Securities	 and	Exchange	 Commission	
requirements, we present a summary of the reports so 
submitted:	
 yReport	 on	Periodic	 Control,	 Permanent	 Control;	
Compliance;	 Credit	Risk,	Operational	 Risk,	and	Market	
Risk Activities
 y Report on Structural Risks and Statutory Ratios
 y Report on Bank of Ghana’s Prudential Ratios
 y Report on an overview of the Audit Department and its 
functions
 y Report on Compliance Monitoring, Anti Money Laundering 
and Permanent Supervision ensuring continuous 
monitoring	of	operational	activities.
 y Report on Counterparty Risks
 y Report on Changes in Organisational Structure
 y Report on Business Continuity Plan
 yAudit	Reports	on	Branches	submitted.
 yReport	on	Managing	Conﬂict	of	Interest	within	the	Bank
The	External	 Auditors	 submitted	 their	audit	plan	for	the	year	
and	concluded	 that	the	audit	approach	 will	be	risk	based	and	
control	focused	 and	that	the	audit	will	be	in	accordance	 with	
International	Standards	on	Auditing.	
………………………………….............
Board Chair 
(Margaret Boateng  Sekyere) 
ACCRA  
22	April,	2021		 	 	
 ………………………………….............
Managing Director 
(Hakim Ouzzani) 
ACCRA  
22	April,	2021		 	 	
 Report of the Directors cont’d
By order of the Board
32
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCThe	directors	 are	responsible	 for	preparing	 financial	 statements	
for	each	financial	 period,	which	give	a	true	and	fair	view	of	the	
state	of	affairs	of	the	bank	at	the	end	of	the	period	and	of	the	
profit	or	loss	of	the	bank	for	that	period.	In	preparing	 those	
financial	statements,	the	directors	are	required	to:	
 ySelect	suitable	 accounting	 policies	 and	then	apply	them	
consistently.
 yMake	judgments	 and	estimates	 that	are	reasonable	 and	
prudent
 yState	whether	 applicable	 accounting	 standards	 have	been	
followed	 subject	 to	any	material	 departures,	 disclosed	
and	explained	in	the	financial	statements
 yPrepare	 the	financial	 statements	 on	a	going	concern	 basis	
unless it is inappropriate to presume that the company 
will	continue	in	businessThe	Directors	 are	responsible	 for	ensuring	 that	the	company	
keeps	accounting	 records	 which	disclose	 with	reasonable	
accuracy	 the	financial	 position	 of	the	company	 and	which	
enable	them	to	ensure	that	the	financial	 statements	 comply	
with	the	Companies	 Act	2019	(Act	992)	and	the	Bank	and	
Specialized	 Deposit	 Taking	Institutions	 Act,	2016	(Act	930)	
and	International	 Financial	 Reporting	 Standards.	 	 They	are	
responsible	 for	safeguarding	 the	assets	of	the	bank	and	hence	
for taking steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and 
other	irregularities.			
The	above	statement	 should	be	read	in	conjunction	 with	the	
statement	 of	the	auditors’	 responsibilities	 on	page	36,	which	
is made with a view to distinguishing, for shareholders, the 
respective	 responsibilities	 of	the	Directors	 and	the	Auditors	 in	
relation	to	the	financial	statementsSTATEMENT OF DIRECTORS’ 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
33
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCINDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT
TO THE SHAREHOLDERS OF SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC
Opinion
We	have	audited	 the	financial	 statements	 of	Societe	Generale	
Ghana	Plc	(the	Bank)	set	out	on	pages	40	to	98,	which	comprise	
the	statement	 of	financial	 position	 as	at	31	December	 2020,	the	
statement	 of	profit	or	loss	and	other	comprehensive	 income,	
the statement of changes in equity and the statement of 
cash	ﬂows	 for	the	year	then	ended,	and	notes	to	the	financial	
statements,	 including	 a	summary	 of	significant	 accounting	
policies.
In	our	opinion,	 the	financial	 statements	 present	 fairly,	in	all	
material	 respects,	 the	financial	 position	 of	the	Bank	as	at	31	
December	 2020,	and	its	financial	 performance	 and	cash	ﬂows	
for the year then ended in accordance with International 
Financial Reporting Standards and in the manner required 
by	the	Companies	 Act,	2019	(Act	992)	and	the	Banks	and	
Specialized	Deposit	-Taking	Institutions	Act,	2016	(Act	930).
Basis for opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International 
Standards	 on	Auditing	 (ISAs).	Our	responsibilities	 under	those	
standards	 are	further	described	 in	the	Auditors’	 Responsibilities	
for	the	Audit	of	the	Financial	 Statements	 section	of	our	report.	
We are independent of the Bank in accordance with the with 
the International Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants 
(including International Independence Standards) (IESBA 
Code) together with the ethical requirements that are relevant to	our	audit	of	the	financial	 statements	 of	Societe	 Generale	
Ghana	Plc	in	Ghana,	and	we	have	fulfilled	 our	other	ethical	
responsibilities	 in	accordance	 with	these	requirements	 and	
the	IESBA	Code.	We	believe	that	the	audit	evidence	 we	have	
obtained	 is	sufficient	 and	appropriate	 to	provide	a	basis	for	our	
opinion.
Key audit matters
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional 
judgement,	 were	of	most	significance	 in	our	audit	of	the	
financial	 statements	 of	the	current	period.	These	matters	 were	
addressed	 in	the	context	of	our	audit	of	the	financial	 statements	
as a whole, and in forming our opinion thereon, and we do not 
provide	 a	separate	 opinion	 on	these	matters.	 For	each	matter	
below,	our	description	 of	how	our	audit	addressed	 the	matter	
is	provided	in	that	context.
We	have	fulfilled	 the	responsibilities	 described	 in	the	Auditors’	
Responsibilities	 for	the	Audit	of	the	Financial	 Statements	
section	of	our	report,	including	 in	relation	 to	these	matters.	
Accordingly, our audit included the performance of procedures 
designed to respond to our assessment of the risks of material 
misstatement	 of	the	financial	 statements.	 The	results	of	our	
audit procedures, including the procedures performed to 
address	 the	matters	 below,	provide	 the	basis	for	our	audit	
opinion	on	the	accompanying	financial	statements.Ernst & Young Chartered Accountants
G15, White Avenue
Airport Residential Area
P.	O.	Box	KA	16009,
Airport Accra, GhanaTel:	+233	302	779868	/	4275	/	9223	/	2091
Fax:	+233	302	778894	/	2934
ey.com
34
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC    Key audit matter    How our audit addressed the key audit matter
IFRS	9	introduced	 a	forward-looking	 Expected	 Credit	Loss	
(ECL)	model.
The	ECL	model	is	to	reﬂect	the	general	 pattern	 of	
deterioration or improvement in the credit quality of 
financial	instruments.	
The amount of ECL’s recognized as a loss allowance or 
provision depends on the extent of credit deterioration 
since the initial recognition and recognition of 
impairment	 could	be	done	on	a	12-month	 expected	 credit	
losses	or	Lifetime	 expected	 credit	losses.	Impairment	
computations under IFRS 9 therefore involves the use of 
models	that	takes	into	account:
 yThe	probability-weighted	outcome.
 yReasonable	 and	supportable	 information	 that	is	
available	 without	 undue	cost	or	Loan	loss	provision	
is	a	key	area	of	judgement	 for	management.	
Significant	 judgements	 in	the	determination	 of	the	
Bank’s	Expected	Credit	Loss	includes:
 yUse	of	assumptions	 in	determining	 ECL	modelling	
parameters.
 y portfolio segmentation for ECL computation
 yDetermination	 of	a	significant	 increase	 credit	risk	
and 
 yDetermination	of	associations	between	
macroeconomic	scenarios.
The	use	of	different	 models	 and	assumptions	 can	
significantly	 affect	the	level	of	allowance	 for	expected	
credit	losses	on	loans	and	advances	 to	customers.	 Due	
to	the	significance	 of	such	loans	which	account	 for	about	
50.12%	of	total	assets	of	the	bank,	and	the	significant	
use	of	judgements,	 the	assessment	 of	the	allowance	 for	
expected	credit	losses	is	a	key	audit	matter.
The information on expected credit losses on loans and 
advances	 to	customers	 is	provided	 in	Note20e	 ‘’Analysis	
of	impairment	allowances’’	of	the	financial	statements.We	have	obtained	 an	understanding	 of	the	Bank’s	
implementation process of IFRS 9, including 
understanding of the changes to the Bank’s IT systems, 
processes	 and	controls.	 Additionally,	 we	obtained	 an	
understanding	of	the	credit	risk	modelling	methodology.
We	validated	 and	tested	the	ECL	model	of	the	Bank	by	
assessing the data integrity and the internal controls 
around	the	model.
We have also performed, among others, the following 
substantive	audit	procedures:		
 y Reviewed the accounting policies and framework 
methodology	 developed	 by	the	Bank	in	order	to	
assess	its	compliance	with	IFRS	9;	
 yVerified	 sampled	 underlying	 contracts	 of	financial	
assets to determine the appropriateness of 
management’s	 classification	 and	measurement	 of	
these instruments in the ECL model 
 y Reviewed and tested the methodology developed 
to calculate loan loss provision under IFRS 9, 
concentrating on aspects such as factors for 
determining	 a	‘significant	 increase	 in	credit	risk’,	
staging	of	loans,	testing	specific	 models	related	to	
Probability	 of	Default	(PD),	Loss	Given	Default	(LGD),	
Exposure at Default (EAD)   
 y Tested the accuracy and completeness of data used 
in modelling the risk parameter, Recalculating the 
ECL, 
 yReviewed	 forward	 looking	 information	 /	multiple	
economic scenario elements  
 yFor	stage	3	exposures,	 we	tested	the	reasonableness	
of the assumptions underlying the impairment 
identification	 and	quantification	 including	 forecasts	
of	future	cash	 ﬂows,	 valuation	 of	underlying	
collateral, estimated period of realisation for 
collaterals,	etc.
 y We have also analysed information relating to the 
allowance for expected credit losses on loans and 
advances to customers disclosed in the notes to the 
financial	statements	of	the	Bank.Ernst & Young Chartered Accountants
G15, White Avenue
Airport Residential Area
P.	O.	Box	KA	16009,
Airport Accra, GhanaTel:	+233	302	779868	/	4275	/	9223	/	2091
Fax:	+233	302	778894	/	2934
ey.com
Independent Auditor’s Report cont’d
Allowance for expected credit losses on loans and advances to customers
35
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCErnst & Young Chartered Accountants
G15, White Avenue
Airport Residential Area
P.	O.	Box	KA	16009,
Airport Accra, GhanaTel:	+233	302	779868	/	4275	/	9223	/	2091
Fax:	+233	302	778894	/	2934
ey.com
Other information
The	Directors	 are	responsible	 for	the	other	information.	 The	
other information comprises corporate information (Directors, 
Officials	 and	Registered	 Office),	report	of	the	Directors	 and	
statement	 of	directors’	 responsibilities.	 Other	information	 does	
not	include	the	financial	 statements	 and	our	auditor’s	 report	
thereon.	 Our	opinion	 on	the	financial	 statements	 does	not	
cover the other information and we do not express an audit 
opinion	or	any	form	of	assurance	conclusion	thereon.
In	connection	 with	our	audit	of	the	financial	 statements,	 our	
responsibility	 is	to	read	the	other	information	 and,	in	doing	
so, consider whether the other information is materially 
inconsistent	 with	the	financial	 statements	 or	our	knowledge	
obtained	 in	the	audit,	or	otherwise	 appears	 to	be	materially	
misstated.	 If,	based	on	the	work	we	have	performed	 on	the	
other	information	 obtained	 prior	to	the	date	of	this	auditor’s	
report, we conclude that there is a material misstatement of 
this	other	information,	 we	are	required	 to	report	that	fact.	We	
have	nothing	to	report	in	this	regard.
Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements
The	Directors	 are	responsible	 for	the	preparation	 and	fair	
presentation	 of	the	financial	 statements	 in	accordance	
with International Financial Reporting Standards and the 
requirements	 of	the	Companies	 Act,	2019	(Act	992)	and	
the	Banks	and	Specialized	 Deposit-Taking	 Institutions	 Act,	
2016	(Act	930)	and	for	such	internal	 control	as	the	Directors	
determine	 is	necessary	 to	enable	the	preparation	 of	financial	
statements that are free from material misstatement, whether 
due	to	fraud	or	error.
In	preparing	 the	financial	 statements,	 the	directors	 are	
responsible	 for	assessing	 the	Bank’s	ability	to	continue	 as	a	
going	concern,	 disclosing,	 as	applicable,	 matters	 relating	 to	
going	concern	 and	using	the	going	concern	 basis	of	accounting	
unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Bank or to 
cease	operations,	or	have	no	realistic	alternative	but	to	do	so.
Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the financial 
statements
Our	objectives	 are	to	obtain	reasonable	 assurance	 about	
whether	 the	financial	 statements	 as	a	whole	are	free	from	
material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to 
issue	an	auditor’s	 report	that	includes	 our	opinion.	 Reasonable	
assurance	 is	a	high	level	of	assurance	 but	is	not	a	guarantee	
that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs will always 
detect	a	material	 misstatement	 when	it	exists.	Misstatements	
can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, 
individually	 or	in	the	aggregate,	 they	could	reasonably	 be	
expected	 to	inﬂuence	 the	economic	 decisions	 of	users	taken	on	
the	basis	of	these	financial	statements.As part of an audit in accordance with ISAs, we exercise 
professional	 judgement	 and	maintain	 professional	 scepticism	
throughout	the	audit.	We	also:
 y Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of 
the	financial	 statements,	 whether	 due	to	fraud	or	error,	
design and perform audit procedures responsive to those 
risks,	and	obtain	audit	evidence	 that	is	sufficient	 and	
appropriate	 to	provide	 a	basis	for	our	opinion.	 The	risk	
of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from 
fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud 
may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, 
misrepresentations,	or	the	override	of	internal	control.	
 yObtain	an	understanding	 of	internal	 controls	 relevant	
to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are 
appropriate	 in	the	circumstances,	 but	not	for	the	purpose	
of	expressing	 an	opinion	on	the	effectiveness	 of	the	Bank’s	
internal	control.
 y Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used 
and	the	reasonableness	 of	accounting	 estimates	 and	
related	disclosures	made	by	the	Directors.
 y Conclude on the appropriateness of the Directors’ use of the 
going	concern	 basis	of	accounting	 and	based	on	the	audit	
evidence	 obtained,	 whether	 a	material	 uncertainty	 exists	
related	to	events	or	conditions	 that	may	cast	significant	
doubt	on	the	Bank’s	ability	to	continue	 as	a	going	concern.	
If we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are 
required to draw attention in our auditor’s report to the 
related	disclosures	 in	the	financial	 statements	 or,	if	such	
disclosures	 are	inadequate,	 to	modify	our	opinion.	 Our	
conclusions	 are	based	on	the	audit	evidence	 obtained	 up	
to	the	date	of	our	auditor’s	 report.	However,	 future	events	
or conditions may cause the Bank to cease to continue as 
a	going	concern.
 y Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content 
of	the	financial	 statements,	 including	 the	disclosures,	 and	
whether	 the	financial	 statements	 represent	 the	underlying	
transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair 
presentation.
We communicate with the Directors regarding, among other 
matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and 
significant	 audit	findings,	 including	 any	significant	 deficiencies	
in	internal	controls	that	we	identify	during	our	audit.
We also provide the Directors with a statement that we have 
complied with relevant ethical requirements regarding 
independence, and to communicate with them all relationships 
and	other	matters	 that	may	reasonably	 be	thought	 to	bear	on	
our	independence,	 and	where	applicable,	 actions	 taken	to	
eliminate	threats	or	related	safeguards	applied.Independent Auditor’s Report cont’d
36
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCIndependent Auditor’s Report cont’d
From the matters communicated with the Directors, we 
determine	 those	matters	 that	were	of	most	significance	 in	the	
audit	of	the	financial	 statements	 of	the	current	period	and	are	
therefore	 the	key	audit	matters.	 We	describe	 these	matters	
in our auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes 
public	disclosure	 about	the	matter	or	when,	in	extremely	 rare	
circumstances,	 we	determine	 that	a	matter	should	not	be	
communicated	 in	our	report	because	 the	adverse	consequences	
of	doing	so	would	reasonably	 be	expected	 to	outweigh	 the	
public	interest	benefits	of	such	communication.
Report on other legal requirements
The	Companies	 Act,	2019	(Act	992)	requires	that	 in	carrying	 out	
our	audit	we	consider	 and	report	on	the	following	 matters.		 We	
confirm	that:
 yWe	have	obtained	 all	the	information	 and	explanations	
which	to	the	best	of	our	knowledge	 and	belief	were	
necessary	for	the	purposes	of	our	audit;
 yIn	our	opinion,	 proper	books	of	account	 have	been	kept	by	
the Bank, so far as appears from our examination of those 
books;	
 y Proper returns adequate for the purpose of our audit have 
been	received	from	branches	not	visited	by	us;
 yThe	statement	 of	financial	 position	 and	the	statement	 of	
comprehensive	 income	 (statement	 of	profit	or	loss	and	
other comprehensive income) are in agreement with the 
accounting	records	and	returns.
 yIn	our	opinion,	 to	the	best	of	our	information	 and	
according to the explanations given to us, the accounts 
give the information required under the Act, in the manner 
so required and give a true and fair view of the state of 
affairs	of	the	Bank	at	the	end	of	the	financial	 year	and	of	
the	profit	or	loss	for	the	financial	year	then	ended. y We are independent of the Bank pursuant to Section 143 
of	the	Companies	Act,	2019	(Act	992).
The	Banks	and	Specialized	 Deposit-Taking	 Institutions	 Act,	
2016	(Act	930)	under	Section	 85(2)	requires	 that	we	report	on	
certain	matters.	Accordingly,	we	state	that:
 y The accounts give a true and fair view of the statement 
of	affairs	of	the	Bank	and	the	results	of	operations	 for	the	
year	under	review;
 yWe	were	able	to	obtain	all	the	information	 and	explanations	
required	for	the	efficient	performance	of	our	duties;
 yThe	transactions	 of	the	bank	are	generally	 within	the	
powers	of	the	Bank;
 y The Bank has generally complied with the provisions of 
the	Banks	and	Specialized	 Deposit-Taking	 Institutions	 Act,	
2016	(Act	930).
 y The Bank has generally complied with the provisions of 
the	Anti-Money	 Laundering	 Act,	2008	(Act	749),	the	Anti-
Terrorism	 Act,	2008	(Act	762)	and	regulations	 made	under	
these	enactments;
The Engagement Partner on the audit resulting in this 
independent auditor’s report is Pamela Des Bordes 
(ICAG/P/1329).
........................................................... 
Ernst	&	Young	(ICAG/F/2021/126) 
Chartered Accountants 
Accra, Ghana
22	April,	2021Ernst & Young Chartered Accountants
G15, White Avenue
Airport Residential Area
P.	O.	Box	KA	16009,
Airport Accra, GhanaTel:	+233	302	779868	/	4275	/	9223	/	2091
Fax:	+233	302	778894	/	2934
ey.com
37
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCFINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS 
38
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCTHE 
FINANCIAL 
STATEMENTS
39
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCSTATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS AND 
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31  DECEMBER  2020
      Note   2020	 2019			
        GH¢		 GH¢	
Interest	income	 	 	 	 5	 	 	 	519,463,379		 	454,048,757	
Interest	expense	 	 	 	 6	 	 	 	(114,251,411)	 	(88,235,057)
Net interest income        405,211,968   365,813,700 
Fees	&	commission	income																																																							 	 7	 	 	 	77,148,106		 	74,304,756	
Fees	&	commission	expense	 	 	 	 8	 	 	 	(22,847,209)	 	(23,154,024)
Net fees and commission income        54,300,897   51,150,732 
Net	trading	revenue																																																																			 	 9	 	 	 	41,660,244		 	34,516,774	
Net	income	from	other	financial	instruments	carried	at	fair	value	 10	 	 	 	52,417,416		 	39,746,459	
Other	operating	expense	/income																																																														 11	 	 	 	(4,644,872)	 	17,828,591	
Total other operating income        89,432,788   92,091,824 
Operating income        548,945,653   509,056,256 
Net	impairment	loss	on	financial	assets	 	 	 	 12	 	 	 	(33,349,574)	 	(54,922,666)
Personnel	expense	 	 	 	 13	 	 	 	(128,691,845)	 	(123,237,364)
Depreciation	and	amortization	 	 	 	 22a	 	 	 	(33,588,164)	 	(33,180,681)
Other	operating	expenses																																																										 	 14	 	 	 	(131,686,035)	 	(121,024,195)
Profit before income tax         221,630,035   176,691,350 
Income	tax	expenses																																																																							 	 15	 	 	 	(67,421,120)	 	(48,149,164)
Profit after tax expense        154,208,915   128,542,186 
Other comprehensive income         
Fair	value	on	available	for	sale	financial	instrument	 	 	 	 	 	1,781,205		 	-			
Less	tax		 	 	 	 	 	 	 	(445,301)	 	-			
Other	comprehensive	income,	net	of	income	tax																																													 	 	 1,335,904		 	-			
Total comprehensive income for the period        155,544,819   128,542,186 
Earnings per share:        
Basic	earnings	per	share	(GH¢)		 	 	 	 16	 	 	  0.217 	 	0.181	
Diluted	earnings	per	share	(GH¢)		 	 	 	 16	 	 	  0.217 	 	0.181
40
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCSTATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION 
AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2020
      Note   2020	 2019 
        GH¢ 	 	GH¢		
 Assets         
	 Cash	and	cash	equivalents	 	 	 	 17	 	 	 	1,561,983,616		 	1,295,640,731		
	 Non-pledged	trading	assets	 	 	 	 18	 	 	 	67,896,476		 	57,523,936		
	 Debt	instruments		at	fair	value	through	other	comprehensive	income	 21	 	 	 	108,961,776		 	-		
	 Debt	instruments		at		amortised		cost		 	 	 	 21	 	 	 	427,587,822		 	83,104,992		
	 Loans	and	advances	to	customers	 	 	 	 20	 	 	 	2,562,706,675		 	2,643,394,001		
	 Equity	investments	 	 	 	 19	 	 	 	12,236,465		 	8,862,900		
	 Other	assets	 	 	 	 25	 	 	 	66,511,519		 	62,514,235		
	 Property,	plant	and	equipment	 	 	 	 22	 	 	 	290,748,100		 	290,868,619		
	 Intangible	assets	 	 	 	 23	 	 	 	1,264,470		 	1,728,565		
	 Deferred	tax	assets	 	 	 	 15b	 	 	 	15,309,433		 	271,230		
 Total assets        5,115,206,352   4,443,909,209  
 Liabilities         
	 Deposits	from	banks	 	 	 	 27	 	 	 	3,945,938		 	25,675,390		
	 Deposits	from	customers	 	 	 	 27	 	 	 	3,481,343,321		 	3,169,705,971		
	 Borrowings	 	 	 	 26	 	 	 	366,266,787		 	177,695,977		
	 Current	tax	liabilities	 	 	 	 24	 	 	 	25,752,524		 	35,751,330		
	 Other	liabilities	 	 	 	 28	 	 	 	312,302,893		 	233,119,110		
 Total liabilities        4,189,611,463   3,641,947,778  
 Shareholders’ fund         
	 Stated	capital		 	 	 	 29	 	 	 	404,245,427		 	404,245,427		
	 Income	surplus		 	 	 	 39c	 	 	 	149,907,074		 	66,161,749		
	 Revaluation	reserve	 	 	 	 39d	 	 	 	123,670,260		 	123,670,260		
	 Statutory	reserve		 	 	 	 39e	 	 	 	246,436,224		 	207,883,995		
	 Other	reserves		 	 	 	 39h	 	 	 	1,335,904				 -	
 Total shareholders’ fund        925,594,889   801,961,431  
 Total liabilities and shareholders’ fund        5,115,206,352   4,443,909,209 
  
The	accompanying	notes	form	an	integral	part	of	these	financial	statements.
	 Approved	by	the	Board	on	24	March	2021		and	signed	on	its	behalf	as	follows:
 
……………………………..............................	 	 	 	 ............…………………………......…. 
Margaret Boateng Sekyere (Chairperson)                                          Hakim Ouzzani (Managing Director) 
22	April,	2021	 	 	 	 	 	 	 22	April,	2021
41
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC      
For the year ended 31 December 2020      
Balance	as	at	1	January	2020	 404,245,427	 	66,161,749	 123,670,260	 	207,883,995	 -	 801,961,431	
Movements	during	the	year:	 	 	 	 	 	 				
Profit	for	the	period	 	-	 154,208,915	 	-		 -	 	-	 154,208,915	
Other	movements	in	equity	 -	 -	 -	 -	 1,335,904	 1,335,904	
Dividend	 -	 (31,911,361)	 -	 -	 -	 (31,911,361)
Transfer	to	statutory	reserve	 -	 (38,552,229)	 -	 38,552,229	 -	 	-			
Balance as at  31 December 2020 404,245,427 149,907,074 123,670,260 246,436,224 1,335,904 925,594,889
For the year ended 31 December 2019      
Balance	as	at	1	January	2019	 404,245,427	 30,256,311	 123,670,260	 143,612,902	 -	 701,784,900		
Movements	during	the	year	:	 	 	 	 	 	 				
Profit	for	the	period	 	-					128,542,186		 	-	 	-	 	-	 128,542,186	
Other	movements	in	equity	 	-	 -	 -	 -	 -	 -			
Dividend	 -	 (28,365,655)	 -	 -	 -	 (28,365,655)
Transfer	to	statutory	reserve	 -		(64,271,093)	 -	 64,271,093	 -	 -			
Balance as at  31 December 2019 404,245,427 66,161,749 123,670,260 207,883,995 - 801,961,431Stated  
Capital
GH¢
Stated  
Capital
GH¢Income 
surplus
GH¢
Income 
surplus
GH¢Revaluation 
Reserve
GH¢
Revaluation 
Reserve
GH¢Statutory 
reserve
GH¢
Statutory 
reserve
GH¢Other 
reserves
GH¢
Other 
reserves
GH¢Total 
shareholders’ 
equity
GH¢
Total 
shareholders’ 
equity
GH¢STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31  DECEMBER  2020
42
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCSTATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31  DECEMBER  2020
   2020	 2019
  Note GH¢ 	 	GH¢	
 Cash flow from operating activities
	 Operating	profit	before	taxation	 	 221,630,035	 176,691,350	
	 Adjustments	for:
	 Impairment	provision	 20	 (37,969,111)	 698,214	
	 Fair	value	adjustment	on	equity	investment	 19	 1,038,501		 	(109,751)
	 Fair	value	adjustment	on	available	for	sale	instrument	 39h	 1,781,205		 	-			
	 Fair	value	adjustment	on	non	pledged	trading			assets	 18a	 797,756		 	(213,919)
	 Depreciation	and	amortization	 22	 33,588,164	 33,180,681	
	 Unrealized	gain/loss		on	forex	and	revaluations	 	 5,918,445		 	(15,797,088)
	 Profit	on	sales	of	property,	plant	and	equipment	 11	 -	 (623,961)
 Operating profit before working capital changes  226,784,995 193,825,526 
 Changes in operating and other assets and liabilities
	 Change	in	non-pledged	trading	assets	 18	 (11,170,296)	 	18,408,477	
	 Change	in	loans	and	advances	to	customers	 20	 118,656,437		 	(978,808,015)
	 Change	in	other	assets		 25	 (3,997,284)	 	(7,066,831)
	 Change	in	derivative	financial	assets	 	 -				 	5,380,060	
	 Change	in	deposit	from	banks	 27	 (21,729,452)	 22,008,019	
	 Change	in	deposit	from	customers		 27	 311,637,350	 1,008,323,373	
	 Change	in	other	liabilities	 28	 79,183,783	 53,059,612	
   472,580,538	 121,304,695	
	 Income	tax	paid	 24a	&	24b	 (92,903,430)	 (45,634,918)
 Net cash generated from  operating activities  606,462,103 269,495,303 
 Cash flow from investing activities
	 Change	in	investment	securities	 21	 (453,444,606)	 	608,312,282	
	 Equity	investments	 19	 (4,412,066)	 (5,946,107)
	 Purchase	of	property,	plant	and	equipment	 22b	 (32,605,733)	 (33,670,292)
	 Purchase	of	intangible	assets	 23	 (397,817)	 (662,615)
	 Proceeds	from	sale	of	property,	plant	and	equipment		 	 -				 	762,100	
 Net cash  (used in)/generated from  investing activities  (490,860,222) 568,795,368 
 Cash flow from financing activities
	 Proceeds	from	borrowings	 26	 202,544,707		 	-			
	 Repayment	of	borrowings	 26	 (13,973,897)	 (171,917,428)
	 Dividend	paid	 30	 (31,911,361)	 (28,365,655)
 Net cash (used in)/generated from financing activities   156,659,449 (200,283,083)
	 Change	in	cash	and	cash	equivalents	 	 272,261,330	 638,007,588	
	 Net	foreign	exchange	difference	 	 (5,918,445)	 15,797,088	
	 Cash	&	cash	equivalents	as	at	1		january	 	 1,295,640,731	 641,836,055	
 Cash and cash equivalents  as at 31 december  2020	 17	 1,561,983,616	 1,295,640,731	
 Operational cash flows from interest:
 Interest received   516,115,683	 437,858,960	
 Interest paid  111,882,687 	 	85,814,071	
 Dividend received  133,640
43
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC1. Reporting entity 
Societe Generale Ghana PLC (the Bank) is a limited 
liability	 company	 incorporated	 in	Ghana	under	the	
Companies	 Code,	2019	(Act	992).	The	Bank	is	domiciled	
in	Ghana	with	its	registered	 office	at	2nd	Crescent,	
Royalt	Castle	Road,	Ring	Road	Central,	 Accra.	The	Bank	
is	authorized	 and	licensed	 to	carry	out	the		business	 of	
banking	 and	provides	 retail	banking,	 corporate	 banking,	
investment	 banking	 and	other	financial	 intermediation	
activities	 and	specialized	 financing	 activities	 such	as	
leasing and consumer credits through its network of 
branches	and	outlets	including	divisions	across	Ghana.
The	principal	 activities	 of	the	Bank	are	described	 in	
the	Directors’	 Report.	Societe	Generale	 (Group),	 a	bank	
incorporated in France, is the ultimate parent of the 
Bank.
The	Bank	is	listed	on	the	Ghana	Stock	Exchange	 (GSE).		
This	has	enabled	 the	equity	shares	of	the	Bank	to	be	
traded	publicly	on	the	GSE.
1.1 Authorization for publication
The	financial	 statements	 of	the	Bank	for	the	year	
ended	31		December		 2020	were	authorized	 for	issue	in	
accordance	 with	a	resolution	 of	the	board	of	directors	 on		
24	March	2021
2. Basis of preparation
2.1 Statement of compliance
These	financial	 statements	 of	the	Bank	have	been	
prepared in accordance with International Financial 
Reporting	 Standards	 (IFRS)	 as	issued	 by	the	
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and 
accounting	 requirement	 as	dictated	 by	the	guide	for	
financial	 publication	 2017	issued	by	the	Bank	of	Ghana.	
Except	as	otherwise	 specified	 by	the	guide	for	financial	
publication,	 the	financial	 statements	 were	prepared	 in	
accordance	with	IFRS.
2.2 Basis of measurement
The	financial	 statements	 have	been	prepared	 on	the	
historical	 cost	basis	except	for	the	following	 material	
items that are measured at fair value in the  Statement 
of	Financial	Position:
 yFinancial	assets	and	liabilities	held-for-trading
 yDerivative	financial	instruments
 y Equity investments
2.3 Functional and presentation currency
The	 	financial	 	 statements	 are	 	presented	 in	Ghana	
Cedis	[GH¢],	which	is	the	functional	 and	presentational	
currency	of	the	Bank.2.4 Presentation of financial statements
The		Bank		presents	 its	statement	 of		financial	 position	
in	order	of	liquidity.	 An	analysis	 regarding	 recovery	
or	settlement	 within	12	months	 after	the	reporting	
date(current	 )		and	more	than	12	months	 after	the	date	
is	presented	in	note	36.
2.5 Accounting policies
The	accounting	 policies	 adapted	 by	the	bank	are	
consistent	with		those	of	the	previous	financial	year.
2.6 Foreign currency transactions
Transactions denominated in foreign currencies are  
recorded in the functional currency using the exchange 
rates	prevailing	 at	the	date	of	the	transactions.	 Monetary	
assets	and	liabilities	 denominated	 in	foreign	currencies	
are translated at the functional currency rate of exchange 
ruling	at	the	reporting	date.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from 
the  settlement  of  foreign  currency  transactions are 
recognized	 in	profit	or	loss	under	the	heading	 “trading	
revenue”.	 Foreign	 exchange	 gains	and	losses	resulting	
from	the	translation	 at	year-end	 exchange	 rates	of	
monetary	 assets	and	liabilities	 denominated	 in	foreign	
currencies	 are	recognized	 in	profit	or	loss	under	the	
heading	“other	operating	income’’.
The	effect	of	exchange	 rate	changes	 on	cash	and	cash	
equivalents held or due in a foreign currency is reported 
in	the	statement	 of	cash	ﬂow	 as	part	of	the	reconciliation	
of	cash	and	cash	equivalents	 at	the	beginning	 and	end	
of	the	period.	This	amount	 is			presented	 separately	
from	cash	ﬂows	 from	operating,	 investing	 and	financing	
activities	 and	includes	 the	differences,		 if		any,	had	those	
cash	ﬂows		 been	reported		 at	end	of	period	exchange	
rates.
2.7 Segmental reporting
IFRS	8	requires	 the	identification	 of	operating	 segments	
to	be	on	the	basis	of	internal	 reports	that	are	reviewed	
by	an	entity’s	Chief	Operating	 Decision	 Maker	(CODM)	
to allocate resources to the segment and assess its 
performance.
IFRS	8	requires	 entities	whose	shares	or	debts	are	traded	
publicly	to	produce	segmental	report.
Societe	 Generale	 Ghana	PLC	is	managed	 on	a	basis	
that	takes	account	 of	the	different	 business	 lines	that	
dominate	 the	operating	 activities	 of	the	Bank.	Major	
business	lines	of	the	Bank	are:
a.	Retail	banking
b.	Corporate	banking
c.	 TreasuryNOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31  DECEMBER  2020
44
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCThe	banking	 activities	 of	the	Bank	have	been	segmented	
into	various	 business	 lines.	The	profitability	 of	these	
business	 lines		is		assessed	 based	on	the	profit	or		loss	
statement	produced.	These	are	illustrated	in	Note	38.
2.8 Property, plant and equipment - continued
Properties in the course of construction for provision 
of services or administrative purposes are carried 
at	cost,	less	any	recognised	 impairment	 loss.	Cost	
includes professional fees and, for qualifying assets, 
borrowing	 costs	capitalised	 in	accordance	 with	the	
bank’s	accounting	 policy.	Such	properties	 are	classified	
to the appropriate categories of property, plant and 
equipment	 when	completed	 and	ready	for	intended	 use.	
Depreciation	 of	these	assets,	on	the	same	basis	as	other	
property assets, commences when the assets are ready 
for	their	intended	use.
Depreciation	 on	revalued	 buildings	 is	recognised	 in	
profit	or	loss.	On	the	subsequent	 sale	or	retirement	 of	a	
revalued	 property,	 the	attributable	 revaluation	 surplus	
remaining in the properties revaluation reserve is 
transferred	directly	to	retained	earnings.	
Depreciation	 is	recognised	 so	as	to	write	off	the	cost	
or valuation of assets (other than freehold land and 
properties under construction) less their residual 
values	over	their	useful	lives,	using	the	straight-line	
method.	 The	estimated	 useful	lives,	residual	 values	
and depreciation method are reviewed at the end of 
each	reporting	 period,	with	the	effect	of	any	changes	 in	
estimate	accounted	for	on	a	prospective	basis.	
The current annual depreciation rates for each class of 
property,	plant	and	equipment	are	as	follows:
Buildings																																																3.0%	
Furniture		and	equipment															20.0%
Computer																																															33.3%
Household		furniture																									25.0%
Motor		vehicles																																					33.3%	
Leasehold  land  amortized over leased period
Right of use  assets are amortised  over the shorter of the  
lease	term	and	the	asset’s		useful	life.
Freehold land not depreciated
Costs   associated   with   routine   servicing   and 
maintenance	 of	assets	are	expensed	 as	incurred.	
Subsequent	 expenditure	 is	only	capitalized	 if	it	is	
probable	 that	future	economic	 benefits	 associated	 with	
the	item	will	ﬂow	to	the	Bank.		The carrying values of property and equipment are 
reviewed for indications of impairment annually, or 
when events or changes in circumstances indicate 
the	carrying	 value	may	not	be	recoverable.	 If	any	such	
indication exists and where the carrying values exceed 
the	estimated	 recoverable	 amount,	 the	assets	or	cash-
generating	 units	are	written	down	to	their	recoverable	
amount.
The	recoverable	 amount	 of	property	 and	equipment	 is	
the	greater	of	fair	value	less	costs	to	sell	and	value	in	use.	
In	assessing	 value	in	use,	the	estimated	 future	cash	ﬂows		
are	discounted		 to	their	present	 value	using	a		pre-tax		
discount		 rate	that	reﬂects	current	market	assessments	
of	the	time	value	of	money	and	the	risks	specific	 to	the	
asset.			
An item of property, plant and equipment is 
derecognized upon disposal or when no future economic 
benefits		 are	expected	 to	arise	from	the	continued	 use	
of	the	asset.	Any	gain	or	loss	arising	on	derecognizing	
of	the	asset	(calculated	 as	the	difference	 between	 the	
net disposal  proceeds and the carrying amount of the 
item)	is	included	 in	profit	or	loss	in	the	year	the	item	is	
derecognized.
Residual values, useful lives and methods of depreciation 
for	property	 and	equipment	 are	reviewed,	 and	adjusted	
if	appropriate,	at	each	reporting	date.
The new standard IFRS 16 Accounting for leases, which 
became	 effective	 on	1	January	 2019,	has	been	adopted	
by	the	bank.			This	standard		 replaces	 IAS	17,	which	was	
governing	 both	operating	 and	finance	 lease.	IFRS	16	
defines	lease	as	a	contact	that	conveys	 the	right	to	use	
an asset (underlying asset) for a period in exchange for 
a	consideration.		 Under	the	new	standard,	 Lessees	 are	
no	longer	required	 to	distinguish	 between	 finance	and	
operating	 leases.	Instead,	 they	are	to	recognize	 a	right	
of	use	asset	and	a	corresponding	 lease	liability	 at	the	
inception	 of	the	lease	and	subsequently	 depreciate	 the	
asset	over	the	lease	term.	
2.9 Intangible assets: computer software 
Costs	incurred	 to	acquire	 and	bring	to	use	specific	
computer	 software	 licenses	 are	capitalized.	 Following	
initial	recognition,	 intangible	 assets	are	carried	at	cost	
less accumulated amortization and any impairment 
losses.	The	amortization	 period	and	method	 for	an	
intangible	 asset,	in	this	case	computer	 software,	 are	
reviewed	 at	least	at	each	reporting	 date.	Changes	 in	
the expected useful life in the asset are accounted for 
by	changing	 the	amortization	 period	or	method,	 as	
appropriate, and treated as changes in accounting 
estimates.	 The	amortization	 expense	 on	the	intangible	
assets	is	recognized	 in	profit	or	loss	in	the	expense	
category	 consistent	 with	the	function	 of	the	intangible	Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
45
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCasset.	Amortisation	 is	calculated	 using	the	straight	 line	
method	 on	the	basis	of	the	expected	 useful	lives	of	the	
assets	which	range	between	3	and	5	years.
The	carrying	 values	of	intangible	 assets	are	reviewed	
for indications of impairment annually or when events 
or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying 
value	may	not	be	recoverable.
If any such indication exists and where the carrying 
values	exceed	the	estimated	 recoverable	 amount,	 the	
assets	or	cash-generating	 units	are	written	down	to	their	
recoverable	amount.
 The	recoverable	 amount	 of	intangible	 assets	is	the	
greater	of	fair	value	less	costs	to	sell	and	value	in	use.	In	
assessing	 value	in	use,	the	estimated	 future	cash	ﬂows		
are	discounted		 to	their	present		 value	using	a	pre-tax		
discount		 rate	that	reﬂects	current	market	assessments	
of	the	time	value	of	money	and	the	risks	specific	 to	the	
asset.
Gains	or	losses	arising	from	de-	recognition	 of	an	
intangible	 asset	are	measured		 as	the	difference	 between	
the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of 
the	asset	and	are	recognized	 in	profit	or	loss	when	the	
asset	is	derecognized.
2.10 Provisions
The Bank recognizes provisions when it has a present 
obligation	 (legal	or	constructive)	 as	a	result	of	a	past	
event	and	it	is	probable	 that	an	outﬂow	 of		resources			
embodying	 	 	 economic	 	 benefits	 will	be	required	 to	
settle	the	obligation	 and	a	reliable	 estimate	 can	be	
made	of	the	amount	 of	the	obligation.	 Where	the	Bank	
expects	 some	or	all	of	a	provision	 to	be	reimbursed,	 the	
reimbursement	 is	recognized	 as	a	separate	 asset	but	
only	when	the	reimbursement	is	virtually	certain.
The expense relating to any provision is presented in 
profit	or	loss	net	of	any	reimbursement.
If	the	effect	of	the	time	value	of	money	is	material,	
provisions	 are	determined	 by	discounting	 the	expected		
future	cash	ﬂows		 at	a	pre-tax		 rate	that	reﬂects	current		
market  assessments   of the time value of money and, 
where	appropriate,	the	risks	specific	to	the	liability.
2.11 Employee benefits
The	Bank	contributes	 to	a	three-tier	 defined	contribution	
scheme	 on	behalf	of	employees.	 The	tier	one	and	two	
are	mandatory.	 The	Bank	contributions	 10%	towards	
the	voluntary	tier	three	plan.
2.12 Revenue
Revenue	 is	recognized	 to	the	extent	that	it	is	probable	
that	the	economic	 benefits	 will	ﬂow	 to	the	Bank	and	
the	revenue	 can	be	reliably	 measured.	 The	following		specific		 recognition	 criteria	are	met	before	revenue	 is	
recognized:
a. Interest income
Under		IFRS	9	,	interest	 income	 is	recorded	 using	the	
effective	 interest	 rate	(EIR)	method	 for	all	financial	
instruments	 measured	 at	amortised	 cost	and	financial	
instruments	 designated	 at	FVPL.	Interest	 income		 on	
interest	bearing	financial	 assets	measured	 at	FVOCI,		are	
also	recorded	 by	using	the	EIR	method.	 The	EIR	is	the	rate	
that exactly discounts estimated future cash receipts 
through	 the	expected	 life	of	the	financial	 instrument	 or,	
when appropriate, a shorter period, to the net carrying 
amount	 of	the	financial	 asset.	The	EIR	(and	therefore,	
the	amortised	 cost	of	the	asset)	is	calculated	 by	taking	
into account any discount or premium on acquisition, 
fees	and	costs	that	are	an	integral	 part	of	the	EIR.	The	
Bank recognises interest income using a rate of return 
that	represents	 the	best	estimate	 of	a	constant	 rate	
of	return	over	the	expected	 life	of	the	loan.	Hence,	it	
recognises	 the	effect	of	potentially	 different	 interest	
rates charged at various stages, and other characteristics 
of the product life cycle (including prepayments, penalty 
interest	and	charges).
If	expectations	 regarding	 the	cash	ﬂows	 on	the	financial	
asset are revised for reasons other than credit risk, 
the	adjustment	 is	booked	 as	a	positive	 or	negative	
adjustment	 to	the	carrying	 amount	 of	the	asset	in	
the	statement	 of	financial	 position	 with	an	increase	
or	reduction	 in	interest	 income.	 The	adjustment	 is	
subsequently	 amortised	 through	 Interest	 and	similar	
income	in	the	statement	of	profit	or	loss.
When	a	financial	 asset	becomes	 credit-impaired	 and	
is, therefore, regarded as ‘Stage 3’ , the Bank calculates 
interest	 income	 by	applying	 the	effective	 interest	 rate	
to	the	net	amortised	 cost	of	the	financial	 asset.	If	the	
financial	 assets	cures	and	is	no	longer	credit-impaired,	
the Bank reverts to calculating interest income on a 
gross	basis.
For	purchased	 or	originated	 credit-impaired	 (POCI)	
financial	 assets	the	Bank	calculates	 interest	 income	by	
calculating	 the	credit-adjusted	 EIR	and	applying	 that	rate	
to	the	amortised	 cost	of	the	asset.	The	credit-adjusted	
EIR is the interest rate that, at original recognition, 
discounts	 the	estimated	 future	cash	 ﬂows	 (including	
credit	losses)	to	the	amortised	cost	of	the	POCI	assets.
Interest	 income	 on	all	trading	 assets	and	financial	
assets	mandatorily	 required	 to	be	measured	 at	FVPL	
is recognised using the contractual interest rate in net 
trading	 income	 and	Net	gains/(losses)	 on	financial	
assets	at	fair	value	through	profit	or	loss,	respectively.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
46
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCb. Commissions and fees
Commission and fees, revenues and expenses that are 
integral	 part	of	financial	 instruments	 and	are	included	
in	the	measurement		 of	the	effective	 interest	 rate	are	
spread	over	the	period	of	the	financial		 instruments.	
Commission and fees in respect of services are 
recognized	 in	the	profit	or	loss	statement		 when	the	
related	 services	 are	performed.	 The	Bank’s	revenue	
contracts do not typically include multiple performance 
obligations.
The Bank earns commission and fees from a diverse 
range	of	services	 provided	 to	its	customers.	 Fees		
revenue	is	accounted		for	as	follows:
 y Revenue   is earned  on execution  of discrete act 
(such as funds transfers, special clearing and fees 
arising from negotiating transactions with third 
parties) is recognized as revenue when the act is 
completed.
 y Income earned  from the provision  of services (such 
as request for special statements, safe custody, 
COTs and advisory services) is recognized as 
revenue	as	the	services	are	provided.
 yFees		which	forms	an		integral	 part		of		the	effective	
interest	 rate	of	a	financial	 instrument	 (such	as	
commitment and processing fees on corporate 
loans)	is	recognized	 as	an	adjustment	 to	the	
effective	interest	rate.
c. Other operating income
This is made up of other operating income including 
bad	debts	recovered,	 dividend,	 profit	or	loss	on	sale	of	
property, plant and equipment, other miscellaneous 
incomes	and	exchange	gains.
2.13 Interest expense
Interest	 	 expense	 is	recognized	 in	profit	or	loss	for	
all	interest-bearing	 financial	 instruments	 measured	
at amortized cost, including loans and advances, as 
interest	accrues	using	the	effective	 interest	rate	method.
The	effective	 interest	 method	 is	a	method	 of	calculating	
the	amortized	 cost	of	a	financial	 liability	and	of	allocating	
the	interest	expense.
The	effective	 interest	 rate	is	the	rate	that	exactly	
discounts  the  estimated future cash payments over the 
expected life of the instrument or, when appropriate, 
a shorter period, to the net carrying amount of the 
financial	liability.
2.14 Taxation
Income	tax	charged	 to	the	profit	or	loss	account	 for	the	
year	comprises	 current	tax	and	deferred	 tax.	Income	tax	
is	recognized	 in	profit	or	loss	except	to	the	extent	that	
it relates to items recognized directly in shareholders’ 
equity or other comprehensive income, in which 
case it is recognized in shareholders’ equity or other 
comprehensive	income.a. Current income tax
Current	 tax	is	the	tax	expected	 to	be	payable	 under	the	
Income	 Tax	Act,	2018		(Act	979)	on	the	taxable	 profit	
for the year, calculated using the tax rates enacted or 
substantially	 enacted	 by	the	reporting	 date,	and	any	
adjustment	 to	tax	payable	 in	respect	of	previous	 years.	
Current	 tax	assets	and	liabilities		 are	offset	when	the	
Bank	intends	to	settle	on	net	basis	and	the	legal	right	to	
set	off	exists.
Current income tax relating to items recognized directly 
in equity or other comprehensive income is recognized 
in equity or other comprehensive income and not in 
profit	or	loss.
b. Deferred income tax
Deferred	 tax	liabilities	 are	recognized	 for	all	taxable	
temporary	differences,	except:
 yWhere		 the	deferred		 tax	liability	 arises	from	the	
initial recognition of goodwill or of an asset or 
liability	 in	a	transaction	 that	is	not	a	business	
combination	 and,	at	the	time	of	the	transaction,	
affects	neither	 the	accounting	 profit	nor	taxable	
profit	or	loss.
 yIn	 	respect	 	 of	taxable	 temporary	 	 differences	
associated	 with	investments	 in	subsidiaries,	
associates	 and	interests	 in	joint	ventures,	 where	
the timing of the reversal of the temporary 
differences	 can	be	controlled	 and	it	is	probable	 that	
the	temporary	 differences	 will	not	reverse	 in	the	
foreseeable	future.
Deferred	 tax	assets	are	recognized		 for	all	deductible	
temporary	 differences,	 carry	forward	 of	unused	 tax	
credits and unused tax losses, to the extent that it is 
probable	 that	taxable	 profit	will	be	available	 against	
which	the	deductible		 temporary		 differences,		 and	the	
carry forward of unused tax credits and unused tax 
losses	can	be	utilized,	except:
 y Where the deferred  tax asset relating to the 
deductible	 	 temporary	 	 difference	 	 arises	from	
the	initial	recognition	 of	an	asset	or	liability	 in	a	
transaction	 that	is	not	a	business	 combination	 and,	
at	the	time	of	the	transaction,		 affects	neither	the	
accounting	profit	nor	taxable	profit	or	loss.
In	 	 	respect	 of	 	deductible	 temporary	 	 	 differences	
associated	 with	investments	 in	subsidiaries,	 associates	
and	interests	 in	joint	ventures,	 deferred	 tax	assets	are	
recognized	 only	to	the	extent	that	it	is	probable	 that	the	
temporary	 differences	 will	reverse	 in	the	foreseeable		
future	and	taxable	profit	will	be	available	 against		 which	
the	temporary	differences	can	be	utilized.
Deferred tax is calculated using the rate expected to 
apply	in	the	period	in	which	the	assets	will	be	realized	 or	
the	liabilities	 settled.	 Deferred	 tax	assets	and	liabilities	
are	offset	when	they	arise	in	the	same	tax	reporting	Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
47
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCentities	 and	relate	to	income	taxes	levied	by	the	same	
taxation	 authority,	 and	when	a	legal	right	to	set	off	exists	
in	the	entity.
The carrying amount of deferred income tax assets 
is reviewed at each reporting date and reduced to the 
extent	that	it	is	no	longer	probable	 that	sufficient	 taxable	
profit	will	be	available	 to	allow	all	or	part	of	the	deferred	
income	tax	asset	to	be	utilized.
Deferred tax relating to items recognized directly in 
equity or other comprehensive income is recognized in 
equity	or	other	comprehensive	 income	and	not	in	profit	
or	loss.
c. Value added Tax -VAT
Revenues, expenses and assets are recognized net of the 
amount	of	VAT	except:
 y Where the value added tax incurred on a purchase 
of	goods	and	services	 is	not	recoverable	 from	
the taxation authority, the value added tax is 
recognized as part of the cost of acquisition of the 
asset	or	as	part	of	the	expense	 item	as	applicable;	
and	receivables	 and	payables	 are	stated	with	the	
amount	of	value	added	tax	included.
 yThe	net	amount	 of	value	added	tax	recoverable	
from,	or	payable	 to,	the	Ghana	Revenue	 Authority	
is	included	 as	part	of	receivables	 or	payables	 in	the	
statement	of	financial	position.
2.15 National stabilization levy
Under	the	National	 Fiscal	Stabilization	 Levy	Act,	2013	of	
Ghana,	financial	 institutions	 and	some	large	firms	were		
required		 to	pay	a	levy	of	5%	of	their	profit	before	tax	
towards		 fiscal	stabilization	 with	effect	from	July	2013.	
The	Bank	has	complied	with	this	statutory	obligation.
2.16 Classification & measurement of financial assets and 
liabilities
2.16.1  Recognition and initial measurement
The Bank on the date of origination or purchase 
recognizes	 loans,	debt	and	equity	securities,	 deposits	
and	subordinated	 debentures	 at	the	fair	value	of	
consideration	 paid.	Regular-way	 purchases	 and	sales	
of	financial	 assets	are	recognized	 on	the	settlement	
date.	All	other	financial	 assets	and	liabilities,	 including	
derivatives, are initially recognized on the trade date 
at	which	the	Bank	becomes	 a	party	to	the	contractual	
provisions	of	the	instrument.
The	initial	measurement	 of	a	financial	 asset	or	liability	
is at fair value plus transaction costs that are directly 
attributable	 to	its	purchase	 or	issuance.	 For	instruments	
measured	 at	fair	value	through	 profit	or	loss,	transaction	
costs	are	recognized	immediately	in	profit	or	loss.Financial	 assets	 include	 both	debt	and	equity	
instruments.
2.16.2  Debt instruments
Debt	instruments,	 including	 loans	and	debt	securities,	
are	classified	 into	one	of	the	following	 measurement	
categories:
 yAmortized	cost;
 y Fair value through other comprehensive income 
(FVOCI);	or
Classification	 of	debt	instruments	 is	determined	 based	
on:
i.	the	business	 model	under	which	the	asset	is	
held;	and
ii.	the	contractual	 cash	ﬂow	 characteristics	 of	the	
instrument
2.16.3  Business model assessment
Business model assessment involves determining 
whether	 financial	 assets	are	managed	 in	order	to	
generate	 cash	 ﬂows	 from	collection	 of	contractual	
cash	ﬂows,	 selling	financial	 assets	or	both.	The	Bank	
assesses	 business	 model	at	a	portfolio	 level	reﬂective	 of	
how groups of assets are managed together to achieve 
a	particular	 business	 objective.	 For	the	assessment	 of	
business	 model	the	Bank	takes	into	consideration	 the	
following	factors:
 y how the performance of assets in a portfolio is 
evaluated and reported to group heads and other 
key	decision	 makers	 within	the	Bank’s	business	
lines;
 ythe	risks	that	affect	the	performance	 of	assets	held	
within	a	business	 model	and	how	those	risks	are	
managed;
 ywhether	 the	assets	held	for	trading	purposes	 i.e.,	
assets that the Bank acquires or incurs principally 
for the purpose of selling or repurchasing in the 
near term, or holds as part of a portfolio that is 
managed	 together	 for	short-term	 profit	or	position	
taking;
 y the frequency and volume of sales in prior periods 
and	expectations	about	future	sales	activity.
2.16.4  Cash flow characteristics assessment
The	contractual	 cash	 ﬂow	 characteristics	 assessment	
involves assessing the contractual features of an 
instrument	 to	determine	 if	they	give	rise	to	cash	ﬂows	
that	are	consistent	 with	a	basic	lending	 arrangement.	
Contractual	 cash	 ﬂows	 are	consistent	 with	a	basic	
lending	 arrangement	 if	they	represent	 cash	ﬂows	 that	Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
48
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCare solely payments of principal and interest on the 
principal	amount	outstanding	(SPPI).
Principal	 is	defined	as	the	fair	value	of	the	instrument	 at	
initial	recognition.	 Principal	 may	change	over	the	life	of	
the	instruments	due	to	repayments.
In performing this assessment, the Bank takes into 
consideration contractual features that could change 
the	amount	 or	timing	of	contractual	 cash	ﬂows,	 such	
that	the	cash	 ﬂows	 are	no	longer	consistent	 with	a	
basic	lending	 arrangement.	 If	the	Bank	identifies	 any	
contractual	 features	 that	could	modify	the	cash	ﬂows	 of	
the instrument such that they are no longer consistent 
with	a	basic	lending	 arrangement,	 the	related	financial	
asset	is	classified	 and	measured	 at	FVTPL.	Non	pledged	
trading	 assets	and	derivative	 assets	of	the	bank	are	
measured under FVTPL whilst Loans and advances are 
measured	 under	amortised	 cost	based	on	their	cashﬂow	
characteristics	and	business	model.
2.16.5  Debt instruments measured at amortized cost
Debt	instruments	 are	measured	 at	amortized	 cost	if	they	
are	held	within	a	business	 model	whose	objective	 is	to	
hold	for	collection	 of	contractual	 cash	ﬂows	 where	those	
cash	ﬂows	 represent	 solely	payments	 of	principal	 and	
interest.	 After	initial	measurement,	 debt	instruments	
in this category are carried at amortized cost using the 
effective	 interest	 rate	method.	 The	effective	 interest	
rate is the rate that discounts estimated future cash 
payments or receipts through the expected life of the 
financial	 asset	to	the	gross	carrying	 amount	 of	a	financial	
asset.	Amortized	 cost	is	calculated	 taking	into	account	
any discount or premium on acquisition, transaction 
costs	and	fees	that	are	an	integral	 part	of	the	effective	
interest	 rate.	Investment	 securities	 are	measured	 under	
amortised	cost.
Impairment	 on	debt	instruments	 measured	 at	
amortized cost is calculated using the expected credit 
loss	approach.	 Loans	and	debt	securities	 measured	 at	
amortized cost are presented net of the allowance for 
credit	losses	in	the	statement	of	financial	position.
Debt	instruments	 measured	 at	FVTPL	include	 assets	
held for trading purposes, assets held as part of a 
portfolio	 managed	 on	a	fair	value	basis	and	assets	whose	
cash	ﬂows	 do	not	represent	 payments	 that	are	solely	
payments	 of	principal	 and	interest.	 These	instruments	
are measured at fair value in the Statement of Financial 
Position, with transaction costs recognized immediately 
in	the	profit	or	loss	statement	 as	part	of	net	income	from	
other	financial	 instruments	 carried	at	fair	value.	Realized	
and unrealized gains and losses are recognized as part of 
Non-interest	 income	in	the	profit	or	loss	statement.	 Non	
pledged	 trading	assets	and	derivative	 assets	of	the	bank	
are	measured	under	FVTPL.2.16.6  Debt instruments measured at FVOCI
Debt	instruments	 are		measured	 at	FVOCI	only		if		the	
assets		are	held	within	a	business	 model	whose	objective	
is	achieved	 by		collecting	 contractual	 cash	ﬂows	 and	
selling	financial	 assets;	and	the	contractual	 terms	of	the	
financial	 asset	give	rise	on	specified	 dates	to	cash	ﬂows	
that are Solely Payments of Principal and Interest (SPPI) 
and	such	assets	have	not	been	designated	as	at		FVTPL.
In addition, on initial recognition, the Bank may 
irrevocably	 designate	 a	financial	 asset	that	otherwise	
meets	the	requirements	 to	be	measured	 at	amortised	
cost or at FVOCI as at FVTPL  if doing so eliminates or 
significantly	 reduces	 an	accounting	 mismatch	 that	
would	otherwise	arise.
2.16.7  Equity instruments
Equity instruments are measured at FVTPL, unless 
an election is made to designate them at FVOCI upon 
purchase.	 For	equity	instruments	 measured	 at	FVTPL,	
changes	 in	fair	value	are	recognized	 as	part	of	Non-
interest	 income	 in	the	profit	or	loss	statement.	 An	
election	 has	not	been	made	to	designate	 any	of	the	
equity instrument at FVOCI as such all equity instruments 
are	measured	at	FVTPL	in	the	current	year.
The	Bank	can	elect	to	classify	 non-trading	 equity	
instruments	 at	FVOCI.	This	election	 will	be	used	for	
certain equity investments for strategic or longer term 
investment	 purposes.	 The	FVOCI	election	 is	made	upon	
initial	recognition,	 on	an	instrument-by-instrument	
basis	and	once	made	is	irrevocable.	 Gains	and	losses	
on	these	instruments	 including	 when	derecognized/
sold	are	recorded	 in	OCI	and	are	not	subsequently	
reclassified	 to	the	profit	or	loss.	Dividends	 received	 are	
recorded	 in	other	operating	 expenses/income		 in	the		
Statement	 of	Profit	or	Loss	and	Other	Comprehensive	
Income.		 Any	transaction	 costs	incurred	 upon	purchase	
of	the	security	 are	added	to	the	cost	basis	of	the	security	
and	are	not	reclassified	 to	the		profit	or	loss	on	sale	of	
the	security.	 Equity	instruments	 at	FVOCI	are	not	subject	
to	an	impairment	 assessment.	 An	election	 has	not	been	
made to designate any of the equity instrument at FVOCI 
as such all equity instruments are measured at FVTPL in 
the	current	year.
2.16.8  Financial liabilities
Financial	 liabilities		 are	classified	 as	non-trading,	 held	
for trading or designated as held at fair value through 
profit	or	loss.	Non-trading	 liabilities	 are	recorded	 at	
amortized	 cost	applying	 the	effective	 interest	 method.		
Held	for	trading	 liabilities	 or	liabilities	 designated	 as	
held	at	fair	value	through	 profit	or	loss,	are	accounted	
for	as	indicated	 above.	A	financial	 liability	 (trading	
or	other)	is	removed	 from	the	balance	 sheet	when	
it	is	extinguished	 –	that	is,	when	the	obligation	 is	Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
49
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCdischarged,	 cancelled	 or	expired.	 The	condition	 is	met	
when	the	liability	 is	settled	by	paying	the	creditor,	 or	
when	the	debtor	is	released	 from	primary	 responsibility	
for	the	liability	either	by	process	of	law	or	by	the	creditor.	
Again	or	loss	on	extinguishment	 of	a	financial	 liability	is	
recognised	 in	the	profit	or	loss	statement.	 Any	net	cash	
ﬂow	in	relation	 to	the	restructuring	 of	financial	 liabilities	
is	an	adjustment	 to	the	debt’s	carrying	 amount	 and	is	
amortised	over	the	remaining	life	of	the	liability.
2.16.9  Impairment
a. Scope
The	Bank	applies	 a	three-stage	 approach	 to	measure	
allowance for credit losses, using an expected credit 
loss approach as required under IFRS 9, for the following 
categories	 of	financial	 instruments	 that	are	not	
measured	at	fair	value	through	profit	or	loss:
 yAmortized	cost	financial	assets;
 yDebt	securities	classified	as	at	FVOCI;
 yOff-balance	sheet	loan	commitments;	and
 yFinancial	guarantee	contracts.
Financial	 assets	migrate	 through	 three	stages	based	on	
the	change	in	credit	risk	since	initial	recognition.
b. Expected credit loss impairment model
The Bank’s allowance for credit losses calculations 
are	outputs	 of	models	 with	a	number	 of	underlying	
assumptions	 regarding	 the	choice	of	variable	 inputs	
and	their	interdependencies.	 The	expected	 credit	loss	
impairment	 model	reﬂects	the	present	 value	of	all	cash	
shortfalls related to default events either (i) over the 
following twelve months or (ii) over the expected life of a 
financial	 instrument	 depending	 on	credit	deterioration	
from	inception.	 The	allowance	 for	credit	losses	reﬂects	
an	unbiased,	 probability-weighted	 outcome	 which	
considers	 multiple	 scenarios	 based	on	reasonable	 and	
supportable	forecasts.
This impairment model measures credit loss allowances 
using	a	three-stage	 approach	 based	on	the	extent	of	
credit	deterioration	since	origination:
 yStage	1	–	Where	there	has	not	been	a	significant	
increase in credit risk (SIR) since initial recognition 
of	a	financial	 instrument,	 an	amount	 equal	to	
12	months	 expected	 credit	loss	is	recorded.	 The	
expected	 credit	loss	is	computed	 using	a	probability	
of	default	 occurring	 over	the	next	12	months.	
For those instruments with a remaining maturity 
of	less	than	12	months,	 a	probability	 of	default	
corresponding to remaining term to maturity is 
used. yStage	2	–	When	a	financial	 instrument	 experiences	 a	
SIR	subsequent	 to	origination	 but	is	not	considered	
to	be	in	default,	it	is	included	 in	Stage	2.	This	requires	
the	computation	 of	expected	 credit	loss	based	
on	the	probability	 of	default	over	the	remaining	
estimated	life	of	the	financial	instrument.
 y Stage 3 – Financial instruments that are considered 
to	be	in	default	are	included	 in	this	stage.	Similar	to	
Stage	2,	the	allowance	 for	credit	losses	captures	 the	
lifetime	expected	credit	losses.
c. Measurement of expected credit loss
The	probability	 of	default	 (PD),	exposure	 at	default	
(EAD), and loss given default (LGD) inputs used to 
estimate	 expected	 credit	losses	are	modelled	 based	on	
macroeconomic	 variables	 that	are	most	closely	related	
with	credit	losses	in	the	relevant	 portfolio.	 The	bank’s	
portfolios	 have	been	segmented	 to	ensure	that	they	are	
consistent in terms of risk characteristics and to ensure 
better	correlation	 with		local	macroeconomic	 variables.	
This	segmentation	 factors	in	all	specific	 characteristics	
associated	with	the	bank’s	activities.
Details	of	these	statistical	 parameters/inputs	 are	as	
follows:
 yPD	–	The	probability	 of	default	is	an	estimate	 of	the	
likelihood	 of	default	over	a	given	time	horizon.	 A	
default may only happen at a certain time over the 
remaining	 estimated	 life,	if	the	facility	has	not	been	
previously	derecognized	and	is	still	in	the	portfolio.
 y EAD – The exposure at default is an estimate of 
the exposure at a future default date, taking into 
account	 expected	 changes	 in	the	exposure	 after	the	
reporting date, including repayments of principal 
and	interest,	 whether	 scheduled	 by	contract	 or	
otherwise, expected drawdowns on committed 
facilities, and accrued interest from missed 
payments.
 y LGD – The loss given default is an estimate of the 
loss arising in the case where a default occurs at a 
given	time.	It	is	based	on	the	difference	 between	
the	contractual	 cash	ﬂows	 due	and	those	that	the	
lender would expect to receive, including from the 
realization	 of	any	collateral.	 It	is	usually	expressed	
as	a	percentage	of	the	EAD.
d. Forward-looking information
The measurement of expected credit losses for each 
stage	and	the	assessment	 of	significant	 increases	 in	
credit	risk	considers	 information	 about	past	events	
and	current	 conditions	 as	well	as	reasonable	 and	
supportable	 forecasts	 of	future	events	and	economic	
conditions.	 The	estimation	 and	application	 of	forward-
looking	information	requires	significant	judgement.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
50
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCe. Macroeconomic factors
In	its	models,	 the	Bank	relies	on	a	broad	range	of	forward	
looking	 information	 as	economic	 inputs,	such	as:	GDP	
growth,	 inﬂation	 rates	and	central	bank	base	rates.	The	
inputs and models used for calculating expected credit 
losses may not always capture all characteristics of the 
market	at	the	date	of	the	financial	 statements.	 To	reﬂect	
this,	qualitative	 adjustments	 or	overlays	 may	be	made	as	
temporary	adjustments	using	expert	credit	judgement.
The Bank determines allowance for credit losses using 
three	probability-weighted	 forward-looking	 scenarios.	
The	Bank	considers	 both	internal	 and	external	 sources	
of	information	 in	order	to	achieve	 an	unbiased	 measure	
of	the	scenarios	 used.	The	forecasts	 are	created	 using	
internal	 and	external	 models/data	 which	are	then	
modified	 to	reﬂect	future	direction	 of	relevant	 economic	
variables	 as	well	as	a	representative	 range	of	other	
possible	forecast	scenarios.
The most likely outcome is aligned with information 
used	by	the	Bank	for	other	purposes	 such	as	strategic	
planning	 and	budgeting.		 The	Bank	has	identified	 and	
documented key drivers of credit risk and credit losses 
for	each	portfolio	 of	financial	 instruments	 and,	using	an	
analysis of historical data, has estimated relationships 
between	 macro-economic	 variables,	 credit	risk	and	
credit	losses.
f. Assessment of significant increase in credit risk 
(SIR)
At each reporting date, the Bank assesses whether there 
has	been	a	significant	 increase	 in	credit	risk	for	exposures	
since	initial	recognition	 by	comparing	 the	risk	of	default	
occurring over the remaining expected life from the 
reporting	 date	and	the	date	of	initial	recognition.	 The	
assessment	 considers	 borrower-specific	 quantitative	
and qualitative information without consideration 
of	collateral,	 and	the	impact	 of	forward-looking	
macroeconomic	factors.
The common assessments for SIR on retail and 
non-retail	 portfolios	 include	 macroeconomic	
outlook,	 management	 judgement,	 delinquency	 and	
monitoring.	 Forward	 looking	 macroeconomic	 factors	
are	a	key	component	 of	the	macroeconomic	 outlook.	
The	importance	 and	relevance	 of	each	specific	
macroeconomic factor depends on the type of product, 
characteristics	 of	the	financial	 instruments	 and	the	
borrower	 .	Quantitative	 models	may	not	always	be	able	
to	capture	 all	reasonable	 and	supportable	 information	
that	may	indicate	 a	significant	 increase	 in	credit	risk.	
Qualitative	 factors	may	be	assessed	 to	supplement	
the	gap.	Examples	 of	situations	 include	 changes	 in	
adjudication	 criteria	for	a	particular	 group	of	borrowers;	
changes in portfolio composition and natural disasters 
impacting	 certain	portfolios.	 With	regards	to	delinquency	and	monitoring,	 there	is	a	rebuttable	 presumption	 that	
the	credit	risk	of	the	financial	 instrument	 has	increased	
since initial recognition when contractual payments are 
more	than	30	days	overdue.
Retail	portfolio	 –	For	retail	exposures,	 a	significant	
increase	 in	credit	risk	cannot	be	assessed	 using	forward	
looking	 information	 at	an	individual	 account	 level.	
Therefore,	 the	assessment	 must	be	done	at	the	segment	
level.	Segment	 migration	 thresholds	 exist	for	each	PD	
model	by	product	 which	considers	 the	proportionate	
change	in	PD	as	well	as	the	absolute	 change	in	PD.	The	
thresholds used for PD migration are reviewed and 
assessed	 at	least	annually,	 unless	there	is	a	significant	
change in credit risk management practices in which 
case	the	review	is	brought	forward.
Non-retail	 portfolio	 –	The	Bank	uses	a	risk	rating	scale	
(IG	codes)	for	its	non-retail	 exposures.	 All	non-retail	
exposures	 have	an	IG	code	assigned	 that	reﬂects	 the	
probability	 of	default	of	the	borrower.	 Both	borrower	
specific	and	non-borrower	 specific	(i.e	macroeconomic)	
forward	 looking	information	 is	considered	 and	reﬂected	
in	the	IG	rating.	Significant	 increase	 in	credit	risk	is	
evaluated	 based	on	the	migration	 of	the	exposures	
among	IG	codes.
g. Expected life
When measuring expected credit loss, the Bank 
considers the maximum contractual period over which 
the	Bank	is	exposed	 to	credit	risk.	All	contractual	 terms	
are considered when determining the expected life, 
including prepayment, and extension and rollover 
options.	 For	certain	 revolving	 credit	facilities,the	
expected	 life	is	estimated	 based	on	the	period	over	
which the Bank is exposed to credit risk and how the 
credit	losses	are	mitigated	by	management	actions.
Presentation of allowance for credit losses in the 
Statement of Financial Position
 yFinancial	 assets	measured	 at	amortized	 cost:	as	a	
deduction from the gross carrying amount of the 
financial	assets;
 yDebt	instruments	 measured	 at	fair	value	through	
other	comprehensive	 income:	 no	allowance	 is	
recognized in the Statement of Financial Position 
because	 the	carrying	 value	of	these	assets	is	their	
fair	value.	However,	 the	allowance	 determined	 is	
presented in the accumulated other comprehensive 
income;
 yOff-balance	 sheet	credit	risks	include	 undrawn	
lending commitments, letters of credit and letters 
of	guarantee:	as	a	provision	in	other	liabilities.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
51
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCh. Modified financial assets
If	the	terms	of	a	financial	 asset	are	modified	 or	an	existing	
financial	 asset	is	replaced	 with	a	new	one,	an	assessment	
is	made	to	determine	 if	the	financial	 asset	should	be	
derecognized.	 Where	the	modification	 does	not	result	
in derecognition, the date of origination continues to 
be	used	to	determine	 SIR.	Where	modification	 results	in	
derecognition,	 the	modified	 financial	 asset	is	considered	
to	be	a	new	asset.
i. Definition of default
The	Bank	considers	 a	financial	 instrument	 to	be	in	default	
as	a	result	of	one	or	more	loss	events	that	occurred	 after	
the date of initial recognition of the instrument and 
the loss event has a negative impact on the estimated 
future	cash	ﬂows	 of	the	instrument	 that	can	be	reliably	
estimated.	This	includes	events	that	indicate:
 ysignificant	financial	difficulty	of	the	borrower;
 y default or delinquency in interest or principal 
payments;
 yhigh	probability	 of	the	borrower	 entering	 a	phase	of	
bankruptcy	or	a	financial	reorganization;
 ymeasurable	 decrease	 in	the	estimated	 future	cash	
ﬂows	from	the	loan	or	the	underlying	 assets	that	
back	the	loan.
The Bank considers that default has occurred and 
classifies	 the	financial	 asset	as	impaired	 when	it	is	
more	than	90	days	past	due	unless	reasonable	 and	
supportable	 information	 demonstrates	 that	a	more	
lagging	default	criterion	is	appropriate.
j. Write-off policy
The	Bank	writes	off	an	impaired	 financial	 asset	(and	
the related impairment allowance), either partially or 
in	full,	when	there	is	no	realistic	 prospect	 of	recovery.	
Where	financial	 assets	are	secured,	 write-off	 is	generally	
after	receipt	of	any	proceeds	 from	the	realization	 of	
security.	 In	circumstances	 where	the	net	realizable	 value	
of	any	collateral	 has	been	determined	 and	there	is	no	
reasonable	 expectation	 of	further	recovery,	 write-off	
may	be	earlier.	Credit	card	receivables	 180	days	past	due,	
are	written-off.	 In	subsequent	 periods,	 any	recoveries	
of	amounts	 previously	 written	off	are	credited	 to	the	
provision	 for	credit	losses	in	the	profit	or	loss	statement.
k. Restructured credit
Loans	issued	by	the	Bank	may	be	subject	to	restructuring	
with the aim of securing the collection of the principal and 
interest	 by	adjusting	 the	contractual	 terms	of	the	loan	
(e.g.	reduced	 interest	 rate,	rescheduled	 loan	payments,	
partial	debt	forgiveness	 or	additional	 collateral).	 Assets	
may	only	qualify	for	restructuring	 where	the	borrower	 is	
experiencing	 financial	 difficulties	 or	insolvency	 (whether	the	borrower	 has	already	become	 insolvent	 or	is	certain	
to	become	insolvent	if	the	loan	is	not	restructured).
Where they still pass the SPPI test, restructured loans 
are still recorded in the Statement of Financial Position 
and	their	amortised	 cost	prior	to	impairment	 is	adjusted	
for	a	discount	 representing	 the	negative	 difference	
between	 the	present	 value	of	the	new	contractual	 cash	
ﬂows	resulting	 from	the	restructuring	 of	the	loan	and	
the amortised cost prior to impairment less any partial 
debt	forgiveness.	 This	discount,	 representing	 earnings	
foregone,	 is	booked	 to	cost	of	risk	in	the	Statement	
of	Profit	or	Loss	and	Other	Comprehensive	 Income	
.As	a	result,	the	associated	 interest	 income	 is	still	
subsequently	 recognised	 at	the	initial	effective	 interest	
rate	of	the	loans.	Post-restructuring,	 these	assets	are	
systematically	 classified	 in	Stage	3	for	impairment	
(credit-impaired	 exposures),	 as	the	borrowers	 are	
deemed	 to	be	in	default.	 Stage	3	classification	 is	
maintained for at least one year, or longer if the Bank is 
uncertain	 that	the	borrowers	 will	be	able	to	meet	their	
commitments.	 Once	the	loan	is	no	longer	classified	 in	
stage	3,	the	assessment	 of	the	significant	 increase	 of	
credit	risk	will	be	performed	 by	comparing	 the	credit	
risk level at the closing date and the level at the initial 
recognition	date	of	the	loan	before	restructuring.
l. Repossessed Properties /Collaterals
In	its	normal	 course	of	business,	 the	Bank	does	not	
physically repossess properties or other assets in its 
loan	portfolio,	 but	engages	 external	 agents	to	recover	
funds,	generally	 at	auction,	 to	settle	outstanding	 debt.	
Any	surplus	 funds	are	returned	 to	the	customers/
obligors.	 As	a	result	of	this	practice,	 the	properties	 under	
legal repossession processes are not recorded on the 
Statement of Financial position
2.17 Regulatory credit reserve
To cater for any excess of Bank of Ghana’s credit loss 
provision requirements over loans and advances 
impairments	 based	on	IFRS	principles,	 a	transfer	 is	made	
from	the	income	 surplus	 (distributable	 reserves)	 to	a	
non-	distributable	 reserves	 in	the	statement	 of	changes	
in	equity,	being	the	Regulatory	Credit	Reserve.
The	non-distributable	 Regulatory	 Credit	Reserve	 ensures	
that minimum regulatory provisioning requirements as 
established	by	the		Bank	of	Ghana	are	maintained.
2.18 Dividend
Dividends declared are treated as an appropriation of 
profit	in		the	year	of	approval	 while	dividends	 proposed		
are	disclosed	as	a	note	to	the	financial	statements.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
52
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC2.19 Cash and cash equivalents
For	the	purposes		 of	the	statement		 of	cash	ﬂow,	 cash	
and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand, cash and 
balances	 with	the	Central	bank	of	Ghana	and	amounts		
due	from	banks		and	other	financial	institutions.
2.20 Borrowing
Borrowings	 by	the	Bank	are	initially	 recognized	 at	
fair	value	and	there	after	stated	at	amortized	 cost.	
Associated	 net	transaction	 costs	of	borrowings	 are	
recognized	 in		the	Statement	 of	profit	or	loss	and	Other	
Comprehensive income  over the maturity period of the 
borrowings.
2.21 Repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements 
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase at 
a		specified	 future	date	are	not	derecognized	 in		the	
Statement of Financial Position as the Bank retains 
substantially	 all	of	the	risks	and	rewards	 of	ownership.	
The corresponding cash received is recognized  in  
the	statement		 of	financial	 position	 as	an	asset	with	
corresponding	 obligation	 to	return	it,	including	 accrued	
interest	 as	a	liability	within	Cash	collateral	 on	securities	
lent	and	repurchase	 agreements,	 	 reﬂecting	 the	
transaction’s		 economic	 substance		 as	a	loan	to	the	Bank.	
The	difference	 between	 the	sale	and	repurchase	 prices	
is treated as interest expense and is accrued over the 
life	of	agreement	 using	the	Effective	 Interest	 Rate	(EIR).	
When	the	counterparty	 has	the	right	to	sell	or	re-	pledge	
the	securities,	 the	Bank	reclassifies	 those	securities	 in	
its	statement		 of	financial	 position	 to	Financial	 assets	
held for trading pledged as collateral or to Financial 
investments	 available-for-	 sale	pledged	 as	collateral,	 as	
appropriate.
Conversely, securities purchased under agreements to 
resell	at	a	specified		 future	date	are	not	recognized	 in	the	
statement	of	financial		position.	The	consideration	paid,	
including accrued interest, is recorded  in the statement 
of	financial	 position,	 within	Cash	collateral	 on	securities	
borrowed	 and	reverse	repurchase	 agreements,	 reﬂecting	
the	transaction’s	 economic	 substance	 as	a	loan	by	the	
Bank.	The	difference	 between	 the	purchase		 and	resale	
prices is recorded in Net interest income and is accrued 
over	the	life	of	the	agreement	using	the	EIR.
If   securities   purchased   under   agreement   to resell 
are	subsequently	 sold	to	third	parties,	the	obligation	 to	
return the securities is recorded as a short sale within 
Financial	 liabilities	 held	for	trading	and	measured	 at	fair	
value with any gains or losses included in Net trading 
revenue.
2.22 Financial guarantees, letters of credit and undrawn 
loan commitments
Financial guarantees are initially recognised in the 
financial	 statements	 (within	Provisions)	 at	fair	value,	being	the	premium	 received.	 Subsequent	 to	initial	
recognition,	 the	Bank’s	liability	under	each	guarantee	 is	
measured at the higher of the amount initially
recognised less cumulative amortisation recognised in 
the	Statement	 of	profit	or	loss	and	Other	Comprehensive	
income.	 The	premium	 received	 is	recognised	 in	the	
Statement	 of	profit	or	loss	and	Other	Comprehensive	
income in Net fees and commission income on a straight 
line	basis	over	the	life	of	the	guarantee.
Undrawn	 loan	commitments	 and	letters	of	credits	are	
commitments under which, over the duration of the 
commitment, the Bank is required to provide a loan with 
pre-specified	terms	to	the	customer.
2.23 Other Assets
Other	current	assets	is	a	default	classification	 for	assets	
which	cannot	 be	classified	 under	any	of	the	major	
assets	classification	 on	the	face	of	the	account,	 or	are		
immaterial	 and	need	to	be	aggregated	 for	presentation	
in a single line item in the Statement of Financial 
position	 .	Accounts	 included	 in	the	other	current	assets	
classification	 may	includes	 inventory	 of	consumables,	
prepayments	and	sundry	debtors.
3.0 Significant Accounting Estimates, Assumptions & 
Judgments
The	preparation	 of	financial	 statements,	 in	conformity	
with IFRS, requires management to make estimates, 
apply	judgments	 and	make	assumptions	 that	affect	
the	reported	 amount	 of	assets	and	liabilities	 at	the	
date	of	the	financial	 statements,	 and	income	 and	
expenses	 during	the	reporting	 period.	Estimates	 made	
by	management	 are	based	on	historical	 experience	 and	
other	assumptions	 that	are	believed	 to	be	reasonable.	
Key	areas	where	management	 has	made	difficult,	
complex	 or	subjective	 judgments,	 often	as	a	result	of	
matters that are inherently uncertain, include those 
relating	 to	the	allowance	 for	impairement(Note	 2.16.9)	
and		the	fair	value	of	financial	 instruments	 (note	35).	
While	management	 makes	its	best	estimates	 and	
assumptions,	 actual	results	could	differ	from	these	
estimates	and	assumptions.
3.1 Significant developments: COVID-19
On	March	11,	2020,	the	World	Health	Organization	
declared	 the	outbreak	 of	a	strain	of	novel	coronavirus	
disease,	 COVID-19,	 a	global	pandemic	 with	Ghana	
experiencing	 its	first	cases	on	12	March	2020.	 	The	
impact	of	COVID-19	 on	the	global	economy	 and	financial	
markets	 has	continued	 to	evolve	with	disruptive	 effects	
on	most	economies,	which	has	contributed	to	increased	
market volatility and changes to the macroeconomic 
environment.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
53
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCIn order to contain the spread of the pandemic, countries 
embarked	 on	massive	 lockdowns,	 business	 closures,	
social distancing protocols, travel restrictions among 
others.	The	effects	of	the	pandemic,	 the	containment	
measures and the phased reopening approach in several 
regions	 could	have	longer-term	 effects	on	economic	
and	commercial	 activity,	 consumer	 behavior	 after	the	
pandemic recedes, and containment measures are 
fully	lifted.	In	conjunction	 with	the	COVID-19	 pandemic	
containment measures, governments, regulatory 
bodies,	central	banks	and	private	organizations	 around	
the	globe	have	continued	 to	provide	 unprecedented	
relief programs and temporary measures to facilitate 
the	continued	 operation	 of	the	global	economy	 and	
financial	 system,	which	are	intended	 to	provide	support	
to	individuals	and	businesses.
As part of the policy response to minimize the risks 
associated with the COVID 19 pandemic, the Bank of 
Ghana put in place the following policies in order to  
create	the	an	enabling	 environment		 for	the		financial	
sector	to	support		 individuals	 and	businesses	 in	these	
times.
 yLowering	 of	the	Monetary	 Policy	Rate	(MPR)	by	
150	basis	points	to	14.5	percent	 from	16%,	which	
it	expected	 to	transmit	 to	lower	bank	lending	rates	
and help ameliorate the challenges in securing 
credit	at	reasonable	 rates	during	this	difficult	socio-
economic	environment.
 y Reduction in Primary Reserve Requirements from 
10	percent	to	8	percent	in	order	to	create		additional	
liquidity	 for	the	banks	for	on	lending	 to	critical	
sectors of the economy to moderate the expected 
slowdown in growth
 y Reduction in prudential limit of Capital Adequacy 
Ratio	from	13.0	percent	 to	11.5	percent	 to	support	
the	extension	of	additional	credit	by	banks.
 y Reduction in provisions for loans in the OLEM 
category from 10 percent to 5 percent to address 
the	impact	of	difficulties	 in	loan	repayments	 due	
to the slowdown in economic activities, which may 
cause	repayment	challenges.
In response to this, Societe General Ghana Plc reduced 
its rates in line with the reduction in the MPR rate for 
new	loans	for	both	retail	and	corporate	 loans.	The	bank	
is	also	helping	its	clients	by	implementing	 various	relief	
measures,	 including	 payment	 deferrals,	 refinancing	 or	
credit restructuring, fee waivers and temporary limit 
increases	across	our	loans	portfolio.			As	at	31	December	
2020,	680	clients	had	benefitted	 from	the	payment	
deferral program, which allowed the clients to defer 
payment	on	their	facilities	for	a	stipulated	time.	In	addition,	 COVID-19	 has	continued	 to	affect	the	
bank’s	employees,	 some	clients	and	communities,	 with	
resultant	 impacts	 on	the	bank’s	operations,	 financial	
results,	present	and	future	risks	to	the	business.	 To	date,	
Societe General Ghana Plc has taken proactive measures 
through	 its	business	 continuity	 plans,	carefully	 planning	
the	return	to	premise	 for	some	employees.		 The	bank’s	
crisis	management	 teams	have	increased	 its	efforts	to	
preserve	 the	well-being	 of	employees	 and	its	ability	to	
serve	clients.		 There	were	no	staff	layoffs	or	redundancy	
resulting	from	the	direct	impact	of	the	COVID.	
3.2 Going concern
The management of the Bank has made an assessment 
of	the	Bank’s	ability	to	continue	 as	a	going	concern	 and	
is	satisfied	 that	the	Bank	has	the	required	 resources	 to	
continue	in	business	for	the	foreseeable	future.
During	the	year	under	review	COVID-19	 a	world	wide	
pandemic	 which	erupted	 late	2019	has	evolved	 rapidly.	
However	 for	SG		Ghana,	COVID-19	 is	not	expected	 to	
have	a	significant	 impact	on	the	entity.	The	 	Bank’s		
management  is   not aware of any material uncertainties 
that	may	cast	significant		 doubt	upon	the	Bank’s	ability	
to	continue	 as	a		going	concern.		 Consequently,		 the	
financial	 statements	 continue	 to	be	prepared	 on	the	
going	concern	basis.
3.3 Deferred tax assets
Deferred tax assets are recognized for all unused tax 
losses	to	the	extent	that	it	is	probable	 that	taxable	
profit	will		be	available	 against	which	the	losses	can	be		
utilized.		 Significant	 management	 judgment	 is	required	
to determine the amount of deferred tax assets that can 
be	recognized	 based	upon	the	likely	timing	and	level	of	
future	taxable	profits	together	 with	future	tax	planning	
strategies.	Deferred	tax	is	shown	in	Note	15b.
4. Application of new and revised International 
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRSs)
4.1 Standards and interpretations effective in the 
current period
The following standards, amendments to the existing 
standards	 and	interpretations	 issued	by	the	International	
Accounting	Standards	Board	were	in	issue:
The	standards	 and	interpretatoions	 that	were	issued	but	
not	yet	effective	 for	the	financial	 year	under	review	are	
disclosed	below.
4.2 Standards and interpretations in issue but not yet 
effective
The new and amended standards and interpretations 
that	are	issued,	but	not	yet	effective,	 up	to	the	date	of	
issuance	 of	the	Bank’s	financial	 statements	 are	disclosed	
54
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCbelow.	The	Bank	intends	 to	adopt	these	new	and	
amended	 standards	 and	interpretations,	 if	applicable,	
when	they	become	effective.	
IFRS 9 financial instruments – fees in the ’10 per 
cent’ test for derecognition of financial liabilities
As	part	of	its	2018-2020	 Annual	Improvements	 to	IFRS	
standards process, the IASB issued an amendment to 
IFRS	9.	The	amendment	 clarifies	 the	fees	that	an	entity	
includes when assessing whether the terms of a new or 
modified	 financial	 liability	 are	substantially	 different	
from	the	terms	of	the	original	 financial	 liability.	 These	
fees	include	 only	those	paid	or	received	 between	 the	
borrower	 and	the	lender,	including	 fees	paid	or	received	
by	either	the	borrower	 or	lender	on	the	other’s	behalf.	
An	entity	applies	the	amendment	 to	financial	 liabilities	
that	are	modified	 or	exchanged	 on	or	after	the	beginning
of	the	annual	reporting	 period	in	which	the	entity	first	
applies	the	amendment.
The	amendment	 is	effective	 for	annual	 reporting	
periods	 beginning	 on	or	after	1	January	 2022	with	
earlier	adoption	 permitted.	 The	Bank	will	apply	the	
amendments	 to	financial	 liabilities	 that	are	modified	
or	exchanged	 on	or	after	the	beginning	 of	the	annual	
period	in	which	it	will	first	apply	the	amendment	 and	
does not expect this will result in a material impact on 
its	financial	statements.
Amendments to IAS 1: classification of liabilities as 
current or non-current
In	January	 2020,	the	IASB	issued	amendments	 to	
paragraphs	 69	to	76	of	IAS	1	to	specify	the	requirements	
for	classifying	 liabilities	 as	current	or	non-current.	 The	
amendments	clarify:
 yWhat	is	meant	by	a	right	to	defer	settlement y That a right to defer must exist at the end of the 
reporting period
 yThat	classification	 is	unaffected	 by	the	likelihood	
that an entity will exercise its deferral right
 yThat	only	if	an	embedded	 derivative	 in	a	convertible	
liability	 is	itself	an	equity	instrument	 would	the	
terms	of	a	liability	not	impact	its	classification
The	amendments	 are	effective	 for	annual	 reporting	
periods	 beginning	 on	or	after	1	January	 2023	and	must	
be	applied	 retrospectively.	 The	Group	is	currently	
assessing the impact the amendments will have on 
current practice and whether existing loan agreements 
may	require	renegotiation.
Onerous contracts – costs of fulfilling a contract – 
amendments to IAS 37
In	May	2020,	the	IASB	issued	amendments	 to	IAS	37	to	
specify which costs an entity needs to include when 
assessing	whether	a	contract	is	onerous	or	loss-making.
The amendments apply a “directly related cost 
approach”.	 The	costs	that	relate	directly	 to	a	contract	
to	provide	 goods	or	services	 include	 both	incremental	
costs and an allocation of costs directly related to 
contract	 activities.	 General	 and	administrative	 costs	do	
not relate directly to a contract and are excluded unless 
they	are	explicitly	 chargeable	 to	the	counterparty	 under	
the	contract.
The	amendments	 are	effective	 for	annual	 reporting	
periods	beginning	 on	or	after	1	January	 2022.	The	Group	
will apply these amendments to contracts for which it 
has	not	yet	fulfilled	all	its	obligations	 at	the	beginning	 of	
the	annual	reporting	 period	in	which	it	first	applies	the	
amendments.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
55
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC5. Interest income 2020	 2019	 
 GH¢		 	GH¢	
Placements	 	19,243,543		 	7,802,551	
Investments	securities	 45,302,861		 	28,290,757	
Loans	&	advances	 	454,916,975		 	417,955,449	
  519,463,379   454,048,757 
Interest	income	recognition	was	based	on	the	effective	interest	rate	(EIR).
6. Interest and similar expense
Savings	accounts		 35,322,870		 	29,675,137	
Current	accounts	 	774,428		 	417,706	
Term deposits 64,649,461   43,534,150 
Borrowings	 13,504,652		 	14,608,064	
  114,251,411   88,235,057 
Interest	expense	recognition	was	based	on	the	effective	interest	rate	(EIR).
7. Fees and commission income 2020		 	2019	 
 GH¢		 	GH¢	
Domestic	operations	 66,764,395		 	62,094,986	
Remittance	 	-				 	457,612	
Cards	operations	 10,383,711		 	11,752,158	
 77,148,106   74,304,756  
Fees and commission income was earned at a point in time    
   
8. Fees and commission expense   2020		 2019 
 GH¢ 	 	GH¢	
Remittance	 	-				 	1,903,711	
Cards	operations	 20,908,369		 	19,441,674	
Cheque	books	 245,062		 	254,391	
Cash	collection	 1,693,778		 	1,554,248	
  22,847,209   23,154,024 
Fees and commission expenses were incurred at a point in time
9. Net trading revenue    
Forex	trading	gains	 148,253,870		 	181,113,417	
Forex	trading	losses	 (106,593,626)	 	(146,596,643)
 41,660,244  34,516,774 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
56
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC10. Net income from other financial instruments carried at fair value   
Gain	from	swap	 37,772,649		 	25,544,696	
Margin	on	bond	trading	 14,948,032		 	13,466,527	
Fair	value	on	equity	instruments	(note	19a)	 (303,265)	 	735,236	
  52,417,416   39,746,459 
11. Other operating expense/income
Profit	on	sale	of	plant,	property	and	equipment	 	-				 	623,961	
Exchange	(loss)/gain	 	(5,086,460)	 	15,797,088	
Rent/hiring	fees	 76,708		 	60,426	
Postages	 61,402		 	122,126	
Dividend	from	associate	 133,640		 	-			
Miscellaneous	&	others	 169,838		 	1,224,990	
  (4,644,872) 17,828,591
12. Net impairment loss on financial assets   
Specific	impairment	 57,825,973		 	35,410,687	
Portfolio		impairment	 (5,806,425)	 	26,566,772	
	Total	impairment	(note	12a)	 52,019,548		 	61,977,459	
Recoveries	 (18,669,974)	 	(7,054,793)
Net impairment 33,349,574   54,922,666 
 
12a. Total impairment
Cash	and	cash	equivalents	(note	17c)	 113,319		 	11,845	
Investment	securites		 503,932		 	-			
Loans	&	advances	(note	20f)	 	51,884,527		 63,615,125	
Lcs	&	guarantees	(	off	balance	sheet	liabilities)	(note	32b)	 (482,230)	 	(1,649,511)
 52,019,548  61,977,459 
13. Personnel expenses    
     
Salaries,	bonuses	and	staff	allowances	 100,671,892		 	98,413,512	
Social	security	fund	contribution	 	6,553,859		 	6,087,391	
Provident	fund	contribution	 5,031,328		 	4,654,799	
Medicals	 4,440,712		 	4,487,858	
Insurance	 793,309		 	565,616	
Termination	expenses	 4,608,554		 	-			
Training	 262,664		 	592,785	
Other	employee	costs	 3,135,173		 	5,038,858	
Directors emoluments (13a) 3,194,354   3,396,545 
  128,691,845   123,237,364 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
2020
GH¢2019
GH¢
57
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCThe	average	number	of	persons	employed	by	the	Bank	during	the	year	was			562		(2019:	575).
The	Bank	contributes	 to	a	three-tier	 defined	 contribution	 plan.	The	employee	 pays	5.5%	and	the	Bank	pays	13%	making	
a	total	of	18.5%.	The	Bank	transfers	 13.5%	to	the	first	tier,	5%	to	a	privately	 managed	 and	mandatory	 second	tier	for	lump	
sum	benefit.	 The	third	tier	is	a	voluntary	 provident	 fund	and	personal	 pension	 scheme	 to	which	the	Bank	contributes	 10%	
of	staff	basic	salary.
13a. Directors emoluments   2020		 2019	 
 GH¢		 	GH¢
Directors	salaries	and	allowances		 2,391,327		 	2,086,712	
Directors	expenses	 187,365		 	894,767	
Directors	fees	 615,662		 	415,066	
 3,194,354   3,396,545 
14. Other operating expenses 2020		 2019	 
 GH¢		 	GH¢	
Donations	 1,281,617		 	853,845	
Advertising	and	marketing	 2,091,360		 	7,376,512	
Office	expenses	(note	14a)	 42,650,604		 	42,155,303
Administrative	expenses	 7,179,894		 	8,628,781	
General	expenses		(note	14b)	 78,482,560		 	62,009,754	
 131,686,035   121,024,195 
14a. Office expenses  2020 	 2019	 
 GH¢		 	GH¢	
Utilities		 6,176,802		 	6,091,564	
Maintenance	of	computer	softwate	&	hardware	 13,230,373		 	14,520,249	
Network		&	communication	 6,887,939		 	7,134,212	
Office	&	computer	stationery		 2,242,205		 	2,242,941	
Repairs	to	furniture	&	equipment		 1,788,374		 	1,697,897	
Resource	hiring			 4,972,948		 	4,566,417	
Other		office	expenses	 7,351,963		 	5,902,023	
 42,650,604  42,155,303 
14b. General expenses 2020		 2019	 
 GH¢		 	GH¢
Professional		fees	and	charges		 	4,868,460		 	4,057,213	
Repairs	and	rental	of	equipment	 1,786,031		 	1,422,365	
It	and		support	services	 43,674,912		 	49,513,442	
Other	general	expenses	 28,153,157		 	7,016,734	
 78,482,560   62,009,754 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
58
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC14c.	 Auditors’ remuneration 2020		 2019	 
 GH¢		 	GH¢ 
 Statutory audit 555,040   507,950 
Auditors’	remuneration	in	relation	to	statutory	audit	amounted	to	GH¢		555,040		(2019	:	GH¢	507,950)	excluding	tax.	
15. Income tax expense 2020		 	2019	 
 GH¢		 	GH¢	
Current	tax	(24a)	 (71,823,122)	 	(74,434,446)
Deferred	tax	(15b)	 15,483,504		 	35,119,850
National	stabilization	levy	(15c)	 (11,081,502)	 	(8,834,568)
Charge	to	statement	of	profit	or	loss	and	other	comprehensive	income	 (67,421,120)  (48,149,164)
15a. Current & deferred tax 2020		 2019	 
 GH¢		 	GH¢
Analysis of charge for the year  
Current	tax	(24a)	 (71,823,122)	 	(74,434,446)
Deferred	tax	(15b)	 15,483,504		 	35,119,850
 (56,339,618)  (39,314,596)
The	current	tax	charge	on	the	profit	is	based	on	Ghana’s	corporate	tax	rate	of	25%	(2019:25%).
 2020		 	2019	 
 GH¢		 	GH¢
15b. Deferred tax 
Balance	as	at	1	january	 271,230		 	(34,848,620)
Tax	expense	recognised	in	profit	or	loss	during	the	year	 15,483,504		 	35,119,850	
Tax	recognised	in	equity	during	the	year	 (445,301)	 	-			
Balance as at 31 December 15,309,433   271,230
Property,	plant	and	equipment	 -	 (41,223,420)	 	(41,223,420)	 -		(41,223,420)		 (41,223,420)
Provisions	and	contingencies		 56,978,154		 	-					56,978,154		 	41,494,650		 	-					41,494,650	
Available	for	sale	instrument		 	-				 	(445,301)	 	(445,301)	 -	 -	 -
Net	tax	liabilities/(assets)	 56,978,154		 	(41,668,721)	 	15,309,433		 	41,494,650		 	(41,223,420)	 	271,230Deferred	tax	assets	and	liabilities	are	attributable	to	the	following:
2019 2020
Assets
GH¢Liabilities
GH¢Net
GH¢Assets
GH¢Liabilities
GH¢Net
GH¢Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
59
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC 2020	 2019 
 GH¢		 GH¢
15c. National stabilization levy 
Analysis of charge for the Year
Charge	to	statement	of	profit	or	loss	and	other	comprehensive	income	 (11,081,502)	 (8,834,568) 
 
In	accordance	with	the	National	Fiscal	Stabilization	Act,	2013	(Act	862)	all	companies	in	Banking,	Non	Bank	Financial	
Institutions,	Insurance,	Mining,	Brewery	and	Communication	are	supposed	to	pay	a	levy	of	5%	of	profit	before	tax	towards
National	Fiscal	Stability.
15d. Factors affecting the current Tax charged for the year
A	reconciliation	of	the	charge	that	would	result	from	applying	the	standard	Ghana	corporate	tax	rate	to	profit	before	tax	to	
tax	charge	for	the	year	is	given	below:
 2020	 2019 
 GH¢		 GH¢
Pretax	profit	for	the	year	 221,630,035		 	176,691,350	
	Tax	charge	thereon	at	Ghana	corporate	tax	rate	of	25%	 55,407,509		 	44,172,838	
Factors	affecting	Charge:	 	
Non	deductible	expenses	 25,676,460		 	30,541,281	
Income	exempted	 (24,744,351)	 	(35,399,523)
National	Stabilisation	Levy	 11,081,502		 	8,834,568	
Tax	on	corporate	profit	(Note	15)	 67,421,120		 	48,149,164
Effective	Corporate	Income	tax	rate	 30.4%	 27.3%
The	tax	charge	on	profit	for	the	year	is	based	on	Ghana’s	corporate	tax	rate	of	25%	.	A	National	Stabilisation	Levy	of	5%	is	
also	charged	(2019	:	Corporate	tax	25%,	National	Stabilisation	Levey	5%).
16. Earnings per share
Basic	earnings	per	share	is	calculated	by	dividing	the	profit	after	tax	for	the	year	attributable	to	the	equity	holders	of	the	
Bank	by	the	weighted	average	number	of	shares,	held	during	the	year	after	deducting	treasury	shares.
The	following	table	shows	the	income	and	share	data	used	in	the	calculation	of	the	basic	earnings	per	share:
   
 2020	 2019
Profit	attributable	to	shareholders	of	the	Bank	(GH¢)	 154,208,915		 	128,542,186	
Number	of	Shares	 	
Weighted	Average	number	of	oustanding	ordinary	shares	 709,141,367		 	709,141,367	
Basic	Earning	per	Share	(GH¢)	 0.217		 	0.181	
Diluted	Earnings	per	Share	(GH¢)	 0.217		 	0.181
Diluted Earnings per Share
The	Bank	has	no	category	of	dilutive	potential	ordinary	shares.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
60
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC17. Cash and cash equivalents
 2020	 2019 
 GH¢		 GH¢
Cash	on	hand	and	cash	balances	with	bank	of	ghana	(note	17a)	 640,873,048		 	556,765,384	
Due	from	banks	and	other	institutions	(note	17b)	 921,536,236		 	739,187,696	
Gross	cash	and	cash	equivalent		 1,562,409,284		 	1,295,953,080	
Less	impairment	 (425,668)	 	(312,349)
 1,561,983,616   1,295,640,731
17a. Cash on hand and cash balances with Bank of Ghana    
 2020	 2019 
 GH¢ 	 	GH¢	
Cash	on	hand	 94,416,351		 	72,521,797	
Balance	with	Bank	of	Ghana	 546,456,697		 	484,243,587	
 640,873,048   556,765,384 
17b. Due from banks and other institutions    
 2020	 2019 
 GH¢ 	 GH¢ 
 
Nostro	account	balances	 902,686,159		 	723,091,266	
Items	in	course	of	collection	 18,850,077		 	16,096,430	
 921,536,236   739,187,696
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to cash and cash equivalents is, as follows:
The	table	below	shows	the	credit	quality	and	the	maximum	 exposure	 to	credit	risk	based	on	the	Bank’s	internal	 credit	rating	
system	and	year-end	stage	classification.	The	amounts	presented	are	gross	of	impairment	allowances.
2020	(GH¢)	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total	
  Individual Individual Individual
Cash	and	cash	equivalents	 	1,562,409,284		 	-				 	-					1,562,409,284	
Total  1,562,409,284   -     -     1,562,409,284 
2020	(GH¢)	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total	
 Individual Individual Individual 
Gross	carrying	amount	as	at	1	january	2020	 1,295,953,080		 	-				 	-					1,295,953,080	
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 1,562,409,284		 	-				 	-					1,562,409,284	
Assets	derecognised	or	repaid	(excluding	write	offs)	 (1,295,953,080)	 	-				 	-					(1,295,953,080)
Transfers	to	stage	1	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	2	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	3	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Amounts	written	off	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Total 1,562,409,284   -     -     1,562,409,284Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
61
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC2019	(GH¢)	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 Total
 Individual Individual Individual 
Cash	and	cash	equivalents	 	1,295,953,080		 	-				 	-				 1,295,953,080	
Total  1,295,953,080   -     -    1,295,953,080
2019	(GH¢)	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 Total
 Individual Individual Individual 
Gross	carrying	amount	as	at	1	January	2019	 642,136,558		 	-				 	-				 642,136,558	
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 1,295,953,080		 	-				 	-				 1,295,953,080	
Assets	derecognised	or	repaid	(excluding	write	offs)	 (642,136,558)	 	-				 	-				 (642,136,558)
Transfers	to	stage	1	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	2	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	3	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Amounts	written	off	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Total 1,295,953,080   -     -    1,295,953,080
 2020	 2019 
 GH¢	 	GH¢	
17c. Impairment allowance for cash and cash equivalents
Opening	balance	 	312,349		 	300,504	
Charge	for	the	year	 	113,319		 	11,845	
Closing	stock	of	provision	 425,668		 	312,349
2020	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total	
 Individual Individual Individual 
ECL	allowance	as	at	1	January	2020	 312,349		 	-				 	-				 	312,349
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 425,668		 	-				 	-				 	425,668
Assets	derecognised	or	repaid	(excluding	write	offs)	 (312,349)	 	-				 	-				 	(312,349)
Transfers	to	Stage	1	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	Stage	2	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	Stage	3	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Amounts	written	off	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Total 425,668   -     -     425,668Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
62
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC2019	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 Total
 Individual Individual Individual 
ECL	allowance	as	at	1	January	2019	 300,504		 	-				 	-				 300,504	
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 312,349		 	-				 	-				 312,349	
Assets	derecognised	or	repaid	(excluding	write	offs)	 (300,504)	 	-				 	-				 (300,504)
Transfers	to	stage	1	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	2	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	3	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Amounts	written	off	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Total 312,349   -     -    312,349
18. Non-pledged trading assets     
   2020	 2019 
   GH¢		 GH¢
Government	bonds	 	 		51,322,316		 	11,492,432	
Treasury	bills	 	 		16,574,160		 	46,031,504
    67,896,476   57,523,936
18a. Non pledged trading assets	 2020	 2019	
 FV FV  
	 Through	P&L				 Through	P&L		
	 GH¢		 	GH¢	
Balance	as	at	1	January	 	57,523,936		 	75,718,494	
Additions	 68,612,759		 	57,442,463	
Disposals	 	(57,523,936)	 	(75,718,494)
Fair	value		 	(716,283)	 	81,473	
Balance as at 31 December 67,896,476   57,523,936 
None	of	the	financial	instruments	was	pledged	as	collateral	during	the	year	(2019:	Nil).
19. Equity investments  2020	 2019 
  GH¢		 GH¢
Advans	Ghana	(Note	19a)	 	2,951,115		 	3,254,380	
YUP	Ghana	 	9,285,350		 	5,608,520	
Total   12,236,465   8,862,900 
 2020	 2019 
 GH¢ 	 GH¢
19a. Advans Ghana
Balance	as	at	1	January	 3,254,380		 	2,519,144	
Fair	value	 (303,265)	 	735,236	
 2,951,115   3,254,380Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
63
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCAdvans Ghana is a Savings and Loans company which 
specializes in the collection of deposits and giving of 
credits.	 Societe	 Generale	 Ghana	has	a	10%	stake	in	
the	ownership	 of	the	company.	 It	is	an	unlisted	 equity	
investment	 which	is	carried	at	fair	value	through	 profit	
or	loss.			During	the		year,	the		company‘s		 operations		
was	negatively	 affected	 by	the	impact	of	Covid	19	which		
resulted	 in	a	reduction	 in	its	net	assets.		As	a	result		SG	
Ghana‘s		 investment		 in	Advans		 Ghana	has	been	fair	
valued	downwards	to	reﬂect	this	development.
YUP	Ghana	Limited	 has	been	incorporated	 as	a	private	
company	 limited	by	shares.	The	Company	 was		registered	
with 500,000,000 shares of no par value with Societe 
Generale	 Group	having	a	75%	interest	 and	Societe	
Generale	 Ghana	having	a	25%	interest.	 The	nature	of	
business	 the	company	 is	authorized	 to	carry	on	are	the	distribution	 of	electronic	 money.	YUP	Ghana	Limited	 is	
fully registered with the Ghana Investment Promotion 
Centre	to	enable	operations	to	commence.
During the year under review,
 y In order to comply with the Payment Systems 
and	Services	 Act,	2019	(Act	987)	which	requires		 a	
minimum	 of	30%	equity	participation	 of	a	Ghanaian	
Company,	 SG	Ghana	increased	 its	interest	 in	YUP	
Ghana	to	35.6%	with	SG	Group	interest	 reducing	 to	
64.4%	(Refer	to		note	note	19)
 yYUP	Ghana	received	 the	license	to	commence	 full	
operations	from	the	Central		Bank	of	Ghana.
YUP	Ghana	and	Advans	Ghana	will	be	held	under	our		
investment company SSBI
 2020	 2019 
 GH¢		 GH¢
20. Loans and advances
Overdrafts	 	534,694,886		 	708,224,806	
Term	loans	 	2,114,641,416		 2,052,842,656	
Export	financing	 	413,136		 	367,386	
Staff	loan	 	68,657,097		 	57,972,086	
Equipment	finance	lease		 	107,362,816		 	125,018,854	
Gross	loans	and	advances		(note	20d)		 2,825,769,351		 	2,944,425,788	
Amortised	cost	adjustment	 	(28,334,030)	 	(26,879,968)
Interest	in	suspense	 	(24,898,406)	 	(20,161,132)
Less:		allowances	for	impairment		(note	20e)	 	(209,830,240)	 	(253,990,687)
 2,562,706,675   2,643,394,001
 2020	 2019 
 GH¢ 	 GH¢
Loans and advances
Current	 	2,596,040,746		 	2,647,558,111	
Olem	 	39,977,578		 	36,803,538	
Gross	performing	loans	 	2,636,018,324		 	2,684,361,649	
Substandard	 	26,654,272		 	31,861,675	
Doubtful	 	35,124,623		 	73,804,284	
Loss	 127,972,132		 	154,398,180	
Gross	non	performing	loans	 189,751,027		 	260,064,139	
Total gross loans 2,825,769,351   2,944,425,788 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
64
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC 2020	 2019
20a. Other statistics
i.	Loan	loss	provision	ratio	 7.43%	 8.63%
ii.	Gross	non-performing	loan	ratio	 6.70%	 8.83%
iii.	50	Largest	exposure	(gross	funded	loan	and	advances	to	total	exposure)	 65.50%	 63.30%
iv.	Liquidity	ratio		 88.27%	 67.56%
v.	Leverage	ratio	 9.91%	 9.30%
vi.	Off-balance	sheet	exposures	(GH¢	m)	 	665.07		 	766.49
	 2020	 2019 
	 GH¢		 GH¢
20b. Analysis by type of customers
Individual	 833,960,192		 	813,750,609	
Private	enterprise	 	1,486,476,662		 	1,741,229,727	
Public	enterprise	 219,946,201		 	118,587,482	
Government	departments	and	agencies	 	219,528,425		 	212,885,884	
Staff	 	65,857,871		 	57,972,086	
 2,825,769,351   2,944,425,788
 
	 2020	 2019 
	 GH¢		 GH¢
20c. Analysis by industry sector
Agriculture,	forestry	and	fishing	 	340,659,130		 	479,087,488	
Mining	and	quarrying	 52,316,025		 	163,524,095	
Manufacturing	 	267,007,161		 	395,559,193	
Construction	 	8,762,270		 	50,257,690	
Electricity,	gas	and	water	 	148,531,412		 	190,068,664	
Commerce	and	finance	 	232,869,730		 	144,870,077	
Transport,	storage,	communication	and	services	 	1,681,204,549		 	1,440,571,022	
Miscellaneous	 	94,419,074		 	80,487,559	
  2,825,769,351   2,944,425,788Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
65
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC20d. Analysis of gross loans and advances
The	table	below	shows	the	credit	quality	and	the	maximum	exposure	to	credit	risk	based	on	year-end	stage	classification.	
The	amounts	presented	are	gross	of	impairment	allowances.
2020	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total	
	 Collective	 Collective	 Specific	
Corporate	lending	 1,772,289,664		 21,162,854		 95,749,138		 1,889,201,656	
Retail	lending	 810,431,147		 26,798,374		 99,338,174		 	936,567,695	
Gross loan balance  2,582,720,811  47,961,228  195,087,312   2,825,769,351 
2019	 	Stage	1		 	Stage	2		 	Stage	3		 	Total	
	 Collective		 	Collective		 	Specific		
Corporate	lending	 	1,844,755,709		 	19,681,318		 	187,753,968		 	2,052,190,995	
Retail	lending	 	793,870,927		 	22,479,741		 	75,884,124		 	892,234,793	
Gross loan balance   2,638,626,636   42,161,060   263,638,092   2,944,425,788
An	analysis	of	changes	in	the	gross	carrying	amount		in	relation	to	corporate	lending	is,	as	follows:
2020	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total	
	 Individual	 Individual	 Specific	
Gross	carrying	amount	as	at	1	January	2019	 	1,844,755,709		 	19,681,318		 	187,753,968		 	2,052,190,995	
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 	717,863,282		 	7,410,523		 	39,859,443		 	765,133,248	
Assets	derecognised	or	repaid	(excluding	write	offs)	 	(769,497,290)	 	(8,166,564)	 	(62,636,601)	 	(840,300,455)
Transfers	to	stage	1	 	(1,362,818)	 	1,362,818		 	 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	2	 	(8,097,578)	 	8,097,578		 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	3	 	(11,206,974)	 	(7,220,058)	 	18,427,032		 	-			
Amounts	written	off	 	(164,667)	 	(2,761)	 	(87,654,704)	 	(87,822,132)
Total  1,772,289,664   21,162,854   95,749,138   1,889,201,656
2019	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 Total
	 Individual	 Individual	 Specific	
Gross	carrying	amount	as	at	1	January	2019	 	904,069,933		 	26,998,723		 	270,976,027		 	1,202,044,683	
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 	1,329,213,328		 	15,616,945		 	68,481,171		 	1,413,311,444	
Assets	derecognised	or	repaid	(excluding	write	offs)	 	(374,762,418)	 	(17,362,591)	 	(110,121,736)	 	(502,246,745)
Transfers	to	stage	1	 	13,575,076		 	(9,766,551)	 	(3,808,525)	 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	2	 	(9,397,414)	 	9,397,414		 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	3	 	(17,942,796)	 	(5,107,231)	 	23,050,027		 	-			
Amounts	written	off	 	-				 	(95,391)	 	(60,822,996)	 	(60,918,387)
Total  1,844,755,709   19,681,318   187,753,968   2,052,190,995Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
66
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCAn	analysis	of	changes	in	the	gross	carrying	amount	in	relation	to	Retail	lending	is,	as	follows:	
2020	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total	
	 Individual	 Individual	 Specific	
Gross	carrying	amount	as	at	1	January	2019	 	793,870,926		 	22,479,741		 	75,884,126		 	892,234,793	
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 	368,034,220		 	5,653,156		 	15,732,333		 	389,419,709	
Assets	derecognised	or	repaid	(excluding	write	offs)	 	(318,826,936)	 	(8,585,486)	 	(9,490,791)	 	(336,903,213)
Transfers	to	stage	1	 	6,220,797		 	(5,323,516)	 	(897,281)	 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	2	 	(19,411,236)	 	19,411,236		 	 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	3	 	(19,455,240)	 	(6,836,102)	 	26,291,342		 	-			
Amounts	written	off	 	(1,384)	 	(655)	 	(8,181,555)	 	(8,183,594)
Total 810,431,147  26,798,374  99,338,174  936,567,695
2019 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 Total
	 Individual	 Individual	 Specific 
Gross	carrying	amount	as	at	1	January	2019	 	688,461,129		 	20,858,456		 	54,253,505		 	763,573,090	
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 	404,341,017		 	9,980,164		 	8,777,533		 	423,098,715	
Assets	derecognised	or	repaid	(excluding	write	offs)	 	(272,913,768)	 	(6,434,356)	 	(6,867,673)	 	(286,215,796)
Transfers	to	stage	1	 	5,834,567		 	(4,336,713)	 	(1,497,854)	 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	2	 	(11,856,744)	 	11,856,744		 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	3	 	(19,972,800)	 	(7,612,559)	 	27,585,359		 	-			
Amounts	written	off	 	(22,475)	 	(1,831,995)	 	(6,366,746)	 	(8,221,216)
Total 793,870,927  22,479,741  75,884,124  892,234,793
20e. Analysis of impairment allowances
2020 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total	
	 Collective	 Collective	 Specific	
Corporate	lending	 46,324,999		 3,886,871		 77,989,000		 	128,200,870	
Retail	lending	 9,079,967		 6,629,403		 65,920,000		 	81,629,370	
Gross loan balance  55,404,966  10,516,274  143,909,000   209,830,240
2019 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total	
	 Collective	 Collective	 Specific	
Corporate	lending	 58,137,922		 1,075,166		 131,541,839		 	190,754,927	
Retail	lending	 10,471,883		 2,635,519		 50,128,358		 	63,235,759	
Gross loan balance  68,609,805  3,710,684  181,670,197   253,990,687Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
67
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC20f. Analysis of impairment allowances
 2020	 2019 
  GH¢ 	 GH¢
At	1	January	 	253,990,687		 	248,768,249	
Loans	written	off	during	the	year	 	(90,427,001)	 	(55,688,000)
	 	163,563,686		 	193,080,249	
Increase	in	provision	 	46,266,554		 	60,910,438	
At	31	December	 	209,830,240		 	253,990,687	
Impairment allowance for loans and advances to corporate customers
2020 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total	
	 Individual	 Individual	 Specific	
Gross	carrying	amount	as	at	1	January	2019	 58,137,922		 1,075,166		 131,541,839		 	190,754,927	
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 18,648,333		 4,216,353		 36,586,000		 	59,450,686	
Assets	derecognised	or	repaid	(excluding	write	offs)	 (29,575,483)	 (1,130,862)	 (3,414,391)	 	(34,120,736)
Transfers	to	stage	1	 (224,868)	 224,868		 -	 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	2	 (242,927)	 242,927		 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	3	 (417,978)	 (741,581)	 1,159,559		 	-			
Amounts	written	off	 -		 -		 (87,884,007)	 	(87,884,007)
Total 46,324,999  3,886,871  77,989,000   128,200,870
2019	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 Total
	 Individual	 Individual	 Specific	
Gross	carrying	amount	as	at	1	January	2019	 24,877,679		 4,794,975		 172,373,000		 202,045,654	
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 39,138,238		 2,576,796		 42,164,000		 83,879,034	
Assets	derecognised	or	repaid	(excluding	write	offs)	 (9,411,408)	 (4,124,354)	 (30,093,000)	 (43,628,761)
Transfers	to	stage	1	 4,353,619		 (1,611,481)	 (2,742,138)	 -	
Transfers	to	stage	2	 (281,922)	 281,922		 -	 -	
Transfers	to	stage	3	 (538,284)	 (842,693)	 1,380,977		 -	
Amounts	written	off	 -		 -		 (51,541,000)	 (51,541,000)
Total 58,137,922  1,075,166  131,541,839  190,754,927
Impairment allowance for loans and advances to retail customers
2020 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total	
	 Individual	 Individual	 Specific	
Gross	carrying	amount	as	at	1	January	2019	 	10,471,882		 	2,635,519		 	50,128,358		 	63,235,759	
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 	4,508,296		 	6,167,443		 	25,765,000		 	36,440,739	
Assets	derecognised	or	repaid	(excluding	write	offs)	 	(7,481,723)	 	498,953		 	(8,521,358)	 	(15,504,128)
Transfers	to	stage	1	 	2,010,756		 	(1,292,931)	 	(717,825)	 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	2	 	(218,975)	 	218,975		 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	3	 	(210,269)	 	(1,598,556)	 	1,808,825		 	-			
Amounts	written	off	 	-				 	-					(2,543,000)	 	(2,543,000)
Total 9,079,967  6,629,403  65,920,000   81,629,370Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
68
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC2019	 	 	
	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 Total
	 Individual	 Individual	 Specific	
Gross	carrying	amount	as	at	1	January	2019	 	3,470,264		 	11,107,585		 	32,737,000		 	47,314,849	
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 	8,150,854		 	2,337,501		 	24,447,000		 	34,935,354	
Assets	derecognised	or	repaid	(excluding	write	offs)	 	(2,954,144)	 	(8,101,300)	 	(3,812,000)	 	(14,867,444)
Transfers	to	stage	1	 	2,214,381		 	(1,049,182)	 	(1,165,199)	 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	2	 	(130,602)	 	130,602		 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	3	 	(278,870)	 	(1,789,687)	 	2,068,557		 	-			
Amounts	written	off	 	-				 	-					(4,147,000)	 	(4,147,000)
Total 10,471,883  2,635,519  50,128,358  63,235,759
Loan	provisioning/impairment	 are	carried	out	in	accordance	 with	Bank	of	Ghana	Policy	as	well	as	the	principles	 of	IFRS.	
Loan	impairment	 losses	calculated	 based	on	IFRS	principles	 are	passed	through	 the	statement	 of	comprehensive	 income.	
Where	provisions	 per	IFRS	is	more	than	provisions	 per	of	Bank	of	Ghana	guidelines,	 no	regulatory	 credit	reserve	is	required.
When the credit loss provision calculated under IFRS principles is less than what is required under the Bank of Ghana, 
transfers	are	made	from	the	income	surplus	account	into	the	non-	distributable	regulatory	credit	reserves.
   2020	 2019 
   GH¢		 GH¢
Provisions	per	Bank	of	Ghana	guidelines	 	 	 157,495,753		 	214,168,993	
Provisions	per	IFRS	 	 	 209,830,240		 	258,612,542	
No	credit	risk	reserve	was	made	in	2019	and	2020	as	IFRS	provision	is	greater	than	provision	under	Bank	of	Ghana	
guidelines.
21. Investment securities
 2020	 2019
Debt	instruments	measured	at	amortised	cost		 427,587,822		 	83,104,992	
Debt	instruments	measured	at	Fair	value	through	OCI			 108,961,776		 	-			
  536,549,598   83,104,992
	 GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢	
 Debt instruments 
measured at 
amortised cost21a. Debt instruments 
measured at Fair value 
through OCIDebt instruments 
measured at 
amortised costDebt instruments 
measured at Fair value 
through OCI 
Cost		 428,091,754		 	107,180,571		 	83,104,992		 	-			
Fair	value		 		 1,781,205		 	-				 -
Less	impairment	 	(503,932)	 	-				 	-				 	-
  427,587,822   108,961,776   83,104,992 -
Lien on investment securities
Included	 in	debt	instruments	 measured	 at	amortised	 cost	is	an	amount	 of	GH¢20million	 placed	with	the	Bank	of	Ghana	(BoG)	by	Societe	
Generale	 Ghana	Plc	as	integrity	 capital	as	part	of	the	requirement	 for	a	Dedicated	 Electronic	 Money	Issuer	(DEMI)	licence	for	YUP	Ghana,	
an	associated	 company	 of	Societe	Generale	 Ghana	Plc.	The	said	amount	 has	been	invested	 by	the	Bank	of	Ghana	(BoG)	in	a	5	year	Bond	
bearing	 an	interest	 of	21.5%	per	annum	and	is	expected	 to	mature	in	March	2025.	The	aforementioned	 and	its	accrued	 interest	 is	a	
regulatory	 requirement	 and	may	only	be	made	available	 to	Societe	Generale	 Ghana	Plc	in	the	instances	 where	the	licence	is	cancelled,	
expired	or	revoked	and	after	all	the	liabilities	held	by	YUP	Ghana	Limited	has	been	settled.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
69
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCDebt instruments measured at amortised cost
The	table	below	shows	the	credit	quality	and	the	maximum	exposure	to	credit	risk	and	year-end	stage	classification.	The	amounts	
presented	are	gross	of	impairment	allowances.
2020
	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total	
 Individual Individual Individual 
Government	Bills	and	Bonds	 427,587,822		 	-				 	-					427,587,822	
Total exposure 427,587,822   -     -    427,587,822 
An	analysis	of	changes	in	the	gross	carrying	amount	and	year-end	stage	classification	is,	as	follows:
	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total	
 Individual Individual Collective 
Gross	carrying	amount	as	at	1	January	2020	 83,104,992		 	-				 	-				 	83,104,992	
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 437,338,770		 	-				 	-					437,338,770	
Assets	derecognised	or	matured	(excluding	write	offs)	 (92,855,940)	 	-				 	-					(92,855,940)
Transfers	to	stage	1	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	2	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	3	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Amounts	written	off	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Total  427,587,822   -     -     427,587,822
Impairment	allowance	for	debt	instruments	measured	at	amortised	cost
2020
	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total	
 Individual Individual Individual 
ECL	allowance	as	at	1	January	2020	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 	(503,932)	 	-				 	-				 	(503,932)
Assets	derecognised	or	repaid	(excluding	write	offs)	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	1	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	2	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	3	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Amounts	written	off	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Total (503,932)  -     -     (503,932)
2019   
	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 Total
 Individual Individual Individual 
Government	bills	and	bonds	 83,104,992		 	-				 	-				 83,104,992	
Total exposure 83,104,992   -     -    83,104,992Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
70
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCAn	analysis	of	changes	in	the	gross	carrying	amount	and	year-end	stage	classification	is,	as	follows:
	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 Total
 Individual Individual Collective 
Gross	carrying	amount	as	at	1	January	2019	 691,417,274		 	-				 	-				 691,417,274	
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 46,591,281		 	-				 	-				 46,591,281	
Assets	derecognised	or	matured	(excluding	write	offs)	 (654,903,562)	 	-				 	-				 (654,903,562)
Transfers	to	stage	1	 	-				 	-				 	-				 -	
Transfers	to	stage	2	 	-				 	-				 	-				 -	
Transfers	to	stage	3	 	-				 	-				 	-				 -	
Amounts	written	off	 	-				 	-				 	-				 -	
Total  83,104,992   -     -     83,104,992
Impairment	allowance	for	debt	instruments	measured	at	amortised	cost
Instruments	under	this	category	were	issued	by	the	central	bank	and	government.	Impairment	for	these	instruments	were	assessed	to	be	
insignificant	in	2019.
22. Property, plant and equipment  
	 	 	 2020	 2019 
	 	 	 	GH¢		 GH¢
Property,	plant	and	equipment	(22b)	 	 		290,748,100		 	290,868,619	
    290,748,100   290,868,619 
22a. Depreciation and amortization      
	 	 	 2020	 2019 
	 	 	 GH¢		 	GH¢	
Property,	plant	and	equipment	(22b)	 	 		32,459,174		 	31,877,648	
Intangible	assets	(23)	 	 		1,128,990		 	1,303,033	
    33,588,164   33,180,681
22b. Property, plant and equipment
 Land &  
 Building 2020  Right  of  Use  
 Assets   Computers  Furniture & 
 Equipment   Motor 
 Vehicles    Assets in  
 Course of 
 Construction    Total
	 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 GH¢
Cost/valuation
Balance	as	at	1	January	 	79,832,821		 	203,966,119		 	21,868,925		 	49,743,300		 	8,621,695		 	22,939,034		 	386,971,894 	
Additions	 	184,493		 	13,108,407		 	947,679		 	1,736,399		 	353,400		 	16,011,855		 	32,342,233 	
*Transfers	 	1,046,506		 	39,709		 	-					612,615		 	-					(1,698,830)	 	-			
Write	offs		 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-				 	(3,577)	 	(3,577)
Disposal	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Balance as at 31 December  81,063,820   217,114,235   22,816,604   52,092,314   8,975,095   37,248,482   419,310,550Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
71
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCDepreciation	 GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 GH¢
Balance	as	at	1	January	 	22,482,411		 	15,027,290		 	19,966,852		 	32,597,788		 	6,028,935		 	-		96,103,276 	
Charge	for	the	year	 	6,862,604		 	16,695,061		 	1,135,928		 	6,031,760		 	1,733,821		 	-		32,459,174 	
*Transfers	 	(1,064,311)	 	1,064,311		 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-	 	-			
Disposal	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-	 	-			
Balance as at 31 December  28,280,704   32,786,662   21,102,780   38,629,548   7,762,756   -  128,562,450 
NBV  as at 31 December 2020  52,783,116   184,327,573   1,713,824   13,462,766   1,212,339   37,248,482  290,748,100
	2019
Cost/valuation	 	
Balance	as	at	1	January	 	258,808,734		 	-					20,744,290		 	45,584,312		 	8,201,773		 	25,743,835		 	359,082,944 	
Transfers:	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	-			
From	land	&	building	 	(184,159,794)	 	179,141,922		 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-					(5,017,872)
From	Other	assets	to	ROUA	 	-					11,784,937		 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-					11,784,937
 
Balance after IFRS 16 application  74,648,940   190,926,859   20,744,290   45,584,312   8,201,773   25,743,835   365,850,009 
Additions	 	202,085		 	7,133,570		 	790,815		 	1,419,031		 	197,245		 	12,372,986		 	22,115,732 	
Transfers	 4,981,797		 	5,905,691		 	333,819		 	2,782,917		 	943,359		 	(15,177,787)	 	(230,204)
Disposal	 	-				 	-				 	-					(42,961)	 	(720,683)	 	-					(763,644)
Balance as at 31 December  79,832,821   203,966,119   21,868,925   49,743,300   8,621,695   22,939,034   386,971,894 
Depreciation       
Balance	as	at	1	January	 	21,404,945		 	-			18,574,988		 	25,917,438		 	3,971,457		 	-					69,868,828 	
Charge	for	the	year	 	6,095,339		 	15,027,290		 	1,391,864		 	6,723,311		 	2,639,845		 	-					31,877,648 	
Transfers	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-					(5,017,873)
Disposal	 	 	-				 	-					(42,961)	 	(582,367)	 	-					(625,328)
Balance as at 31 December  22,482,411   15,027,290   19,966,852   32,597,788   6,028,935   -     96,103,276  
NBV as at 31 December 2019  57,350,411   188,938,830   1,902,072   17,145,512   2,592,760   22,939,034   290,868,619 Land &  
 Building 2020  Right  of  Use  
 Assets   Computers  Furniture & 
 Equipment   Motor 
 Vehicles    Assets in  
 Course of 
 Construction    TotalNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
72
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC23. Intangible assets
 2020	 2019 
  GH¢		 GH¢
Computer	software
Cost
Balance	as	at	1	January	 	21,201,601		 	20,538,987	
Additions	 	664,895		 	432,411
Transfers	of	asset	in	course	of	construction	Note	22b	 	-				 	230,203	
Balance as at 31 December  21,866,496   21,201,601 
Amortisation
Balance	as	at	1	January	 	19,473,036		 	18,170,003	
Charge	for	the	year	 	1,128,990		 	1,303,033	
Balance	as	at	31	December	 	20,602,026		 	19,473,036	
Carrying	amount	 	1,264,470		 	1,728,565	
31 December   1,264,470   1,728,565
The	amortization	periods	and	key	factors	considered	in	determining	the	useful	life	are	the	same	as	disclosed	in	note	2.8	
above.
24. Current Tax:  assets/liabilities 
 2020	 2019 
 GH¢ 	 	GH¢	
Corporate tax (note 24a)	 	(24,680,582)	 	(35,602,172)
National	stabilization	levy	(note	24b)	 	(1,071,942)	 	(149,158)
  (25,752,524)  (35,751,330)
24a. Corporate tax
 2020	 2019 
  GH¢		 GH¢
Balance	as	at	1	January	 	(35,602,172)	 	1,425,257	
Charge	to	statement	of	profit	or	loss	and	other	comprehensive	income	 	(71,823,122)	 	(74,434,446)
Payment/credit	during	the	year	 	82,744,712		 	37,407,017	
Balance as at 31 December  (24,680,582)  (35,602,172)
24b. National stabilization levy 
 2020	 2019 
 GH¢		 GH¢
Balance	as	at	1	January	 	(149,158)	 	457,509	
Charge	to	statement	of	profit	or	loss	and	other	comprehensive	income	 	(11,081,502)	 	(8,834,567)
Payment/credit	during	the	year	 	10,158,718		 	8,227,900	
Balance as at 31 December  (1,071,942)  (149,158)Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
73
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCThe	levy	charged	on	the	profit	is	based	on	a	rate	of	5%	.
In	accordance	with	the	National	Fiscal	Stabilization	Act,	2013,	(Act	862)	all	companies	in	Banking,	Non	Bank	Financial	
Institutions,	Insurance,	Mining,	Brewery	and	Communication	are	supposed	to	pay	a	levy	of	5%	of	profit	before	tax	towards	
National	Fiscal	Stability	.
25. Other assets 2020	 2019 
  GH¢ 	 GH¢
Stationery	and	consumable	stocks	 	151,806		 	195,890	
Prepayments	and	sundry	debtors	(25a)	 	66,308,069		 	62,268,706	
Accrued income  51,644   49,639 
  66,511,519   62,514,235
25a.     Prepayments and sundry debtors
  GH¢ 	 GH¢
Deferred	cost	 	1,343,217		 	597,407	
Unpaid	customer	charges		 	6,569,231		 	6,424,041	
Deferred	staff	cost	 	14,209,047		 	13,018,272	
Rent	prepayment	 	536,954		 	279,782	
Medical	prepayment	 	3,070,767		 	2,855,837	
Bills	payment		 	3,590,921		 	378,368	
Other	sundry	debtors	&	prepayment	 	36,987,932		 	38,714,999	
  66,308,069   62,268,706
26. Borrowings  2020		 2019 
  GH¢ 	 GH¢
Socgen	borrowing	 	318,912,566		 	116,367,859	
European	international	bank	 	22,480,716		 	27,763,111	
Proparco	 	24,873,505		 	33,191,271	
Edaif	managed	fund	 	-				 	373,736	
  366,266,787   177,695,977
The	Bank	has	not	had	any	defaults	of	principal,	interest	or	other	breaches	with	regard	to	any	liabilities	during	2020	or	2019.
Summary of  borrowing arrangements
Societe de Promotion et de Participation pour la 
Cooperation	 Economique	 (PROPARCO):		 This	is	a	USD	30	
million	long-term	 credit	line	(‘the	facility’)	 granted	 to	the	
bank.	The	first	draw	down	of	USD	6	million	has	a	fixed	
interest	rate	of	5.12%	and		matured	 on	30	April	2020.	The	
second	draw	down	of	USD	4	million	has	a	fixed	interest	
rate	of	5.19%	and		matured	 on	30	April	2020.	The	third	
draw	down	was	EUR7.5	million.		 The	related	interest	rate	
is	6-months	 Libor	plus	a	margin	of	370	basis	points	and	
will	mature	on	30		April		2024.		As	at	31	December		 2020		
the	amounts	outstanding	is	€	3.5	million
European	 Investment	 Bank	(EIB):	This	is	a	€		20	million	
credit	facility	extended	 to	the	bank	by	EIB.	The	loan	could	
be	drawn	in	EUR	and/or	USD	and	to	be	used	to	finance	up	to	50%	of	the	banks	capital	expenditure	 intended	
to	develop	 the	bank’s	intermediation	 capacities	 (such	
as	developing	 its	branch	network,	 IT	Systems,	 training	
etc.)	and	for	financing	 eligible	 Private	 Sector	Small	
and	Medium	 Sized	Enterprises.	 The	interest	 rate	on	the	
drawn	portion	is	fixed	at	5.422%	and	matures	 on	1	April	
2024.		As	at		31	December		 2020			the	outstanding	 balance	
is		€	3.85	million
SocGen	 Borrowing	 :	The	bank	took	two	facilitities	 from	
the	group.		The	first	one		is	a		$	65.8	million	renewabIe	
1	year	credit	line.The	 second		 is	a	7	year	loan	facility		
of	$55m		at	Libor	3-months		 plus	a	margin	of	376	basis	
points	and	will	mature	in	4	May		2027.		As	at	31	December		
2020		the	total		amount	outstanding	was		$	55.4	millionNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
74
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC27. Deposit from customers
  2020 	 2019
  GH¢ 	 GH¢
Retail customers    
   
Term	deposits	 	436,274,367		 	366,448,925	
Current	deposits	 	818,411,367		 	670,506,185	
Savings	deposits	 	524,037,991		 	403,370,000
Corporate customers 
Term	deposits	 	224,964,145		 	285,864,661	
Current	deposits	 	1,475,797,067		 	1,441,773,443	
Savings	deposits	 	1,858,384		 	1,742,757	
Interest	payable	on	deposits	
Deposits	from	customers	 	3,481,343,321		 	3,169,705,971	
Deposits	from	banks	 	3,945,938		 	25,675,390	
  3,485,289,259   3,195,381,361
27a. Analysis by type of deposits  2020 	 2019 
 GH¢ 	 GH¢
Financial	institutions	 	48,601,920		 	30,659,804	
Individuals	and	other	private	enterprise	 	3,422,906,822		 	3,085,206,185	
Government	departments	and	agencies	 	2,858,513		 	8,253,547	
Public	enterprises	 	10,922,004		 	71,261,825	
	 	3,485,289,259		 	3,195,381,361	
20	Largest	depositors	to	total	deposit	ratio	 24.30% 30.85%
28. Other liabilities
  2020 	 2019
  GH¢ 	 GH¢
Creditors	 	32,841,345		 	34,595,186	
Other	creditors	and	provisions	(28a)	 	88,753,380		 	52,654,313	
Accruals	(28b)		 	190,708,168		 	145,869,611	
  312,302,893   233,119,110Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
75
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC28a. Other creditors and provisions
  2020		 2019
  GH¢ 	 GH¢
Payment	orders	 	7,394,104		 	5,377,101	
Statutory	deductions	 	2,406,032		 	2,147,858	
Uncleared	effects	(28c)	 	58,379,042		 	27,464,990	
Other	commitments	&	credit	balances	 	9,444,919		 	8,529,756	
Staff	related	provisions		(28d)	 	2,537,000		 	-			
Off		balance	sheet	provisions		 	3,827,276		 	4,309,505	
Other	provisions	(28d)	 	4,765,007		 	4,825,103	
  88,753,380   52,654,313
28b. Accruals
  2020		 2019
  GH¢ 	 GH¢
Staff		&		related		accruals			 	5,868,608		 	7,179,140	
Audit	fees	 	229,267		 	590,512	
Software	maintenance		 	78,086,122		 	52,605,612	
	IT,	marketing		&		other	shared	services		 	67,812,265		 	60,996,196	
Other		accruals		 38,711,906		 	24,498,151	
 190,708,168   145,869,611
28c. Uncleared effects 
This	comprises	uncleared	balances	on	customer	cheques	and	balances	on	customer	transit	accounts	pending	onward	
transfers
Aging	analysis	of	uncleared	effect							 	 2020 2020 2020 2020 
  Below 3  3 to 6   6 to 12  Above 1
 Total months  months   months  year
 GH¢ GH¢  GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
 Uncleared effect  58,379,042   55,134,614   896,557   2,263,411   84,460 
	 	 2019	 2019	 	2019	 2019 
	 	 Below	3	 	3	to	6		 	6	to	12		 Above	1
 Total months  months   months  year
	 GH¢	 GH¢	 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 GH¢
Uncleared	effect	 	27,464,990		 23,556,223		 	1,989,351		 	1,095,725		 	823,690Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
76
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC28d. Provisions      
2020	 Other	Provisions		 	Staff		Provisions			 Total
	 GH¢		 	GH¢		 GH¢
As	at	1	January	2020	 4,825,103		 	-				 	4,825,103	
Provisions	made	during	the	year	 	2,537,000		 	2,809,391	
Provisions	reversed	during	the	year	 	(332,487)	 	-				 	(332,487)
As at 31  December  2020 4,765,007   2,537,000   7,302,007 
2019
As	at	1	January	2019	 	9,577,617		 	-					 9,577,617	
Provisions	made	during	the	year	 2,582,834		 	3,242,121		 	5,824,955	
Provisions	reversed	during	the	year	 (7,335,348)	 	(3,242,121)	 	(10,577,469)
As at 31 December 2019  4,825,103   -     4,825,103
29. Stated capital
	 	2020		 	2019	
a.	 Authorised ordinary shares
Number	of	ordinary	shares	of	no	par	value	 1,000,000,000		 	1,000,000,000
   
b.	 Issued	and	fully	paid	ordinary	shares	 	Number		 	Amount		 	Number			 Amount
	 	GH¢		 	 	 GH¢
Issued	and	fully	paid	ordinary	shares	 709,141,367		 	404,245,427		 	709,141,367		 	404,245,427
30. Dividend declared and paid
	 	2020		 2019 
	 GH¢		 GH¢
Equity	dividend	on	ordinary	shares:
Dividend	declared	 31,911,361		 	28,365,655	
Dividend	paid	during	the	year	 (31,911,361)	 	(28,365,655)
Balance as at 31 December  -     -   
Dividends	are	treated	as	appropriation	of	profit	in	the	year	of	approval	by	shareholders.
31. Related party transactions / disclosures
A	number	 of	banking	 transactions	 were	entered	 into	with	
related	 parties	in	the	normal	 course	of	business.	 These	
include	 loans	and	placements.	 Loans	to	related	parties	is	
done	at	arm’s	length	and	approved	 by	the	highest	approving	
authority as spelt out in the Banks and Specialized Deposit 
Taking	Institutions	Act,	2016	(Act	930).	
a.	 The person to whom the credit facility is given has 
credit worthiness which is not less than that normally 
required	 by	the	Bank	or	other	persons	 to	whom	credit	
facilities	are	given.b.	A	collateral	 provided	 will	be	evaluated	 on	the	same	
terms	and	procedures	 normally	 required	 by	the	Bank	
for any other person to whom a credit facility is given
c.	 The terms and conditions of the credit facility are 
not	less	favourable	 to	the	Bank	than	those	normally	
offered	to	other	persons	and
d.	 The granting of the credit facility is in the interest of 
the	bank.
The	credit	facility	shall	be	approved	 by	the	Board	of	
Directors.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
2020 2019
77
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCDuring	the	year	the	following	transactions	were	performed	with	related	parties:
a. Interest paid and interest received from related parties during the year
 
 Interest Paid  Interest    Interest Paid  Interest 
   Received   Received
  GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Societe	Generale	borrowing	 	10,670,773		 	137,705		 	8,443,289		 88,615
b. Related party balances at December
Lending	to	related	parties:	
 2020		 2019 
  GH¢ 	 GH¢
Officers	and	employees	other	than	Directors	 68,657,096		 	57,972,086	
Nostro	account	balances	with	Societe	Generale	Group	 783,910,594		 	628,198,392	
c. Loans to Directors 
There	were	no	loans	to	directors	during	the	period.	
d. Controlling relationship 
Societe	Generale	Group	is	related	by	virtue	of	its	ultimate	(100%)	controlling	interest	in	SG	Financial	Services	Holding,	
which	has	significant	controlling	interest	in	the	shareholding	in	Societe	Generale	Ghana	PLC.	
32. Contingent liabilities
32a. Breakdown of contingent liabilities 
 2020	 2019
 GH¢		 GH¢
Guarantees	and	indemnities	 195,746,677		 	228,593,438	
Letters	of	credit	&	others	 126,073,791		 	116,796,169	
Other	undrawn	commitments	 70,176,925		 	215,719,434	
Spot	and	forward	purchase	 273,077,597		 	205,383,248	
  665,074,990  766,492,290 
To	meet	the	financial	 needs	of	customers,	 the	Bank	enters	
into	various	 irrevocable	 commitments	 and	contingent		
liabilities.	 These	consist	of	financial	 guarantees,	 letters	of	
credit	and	other	commitments	 to	lend.	Even	though	these	
obligations	 may	not	be	recognised	 on	the	statement	 of	
financial	 position,	 they	contain	 credit	risk	and,therefore,	
form	part	of	the	overall	risk	of	the	Bank.
Letters	of	credit	and	guarantees	 (including	 standby	 letters	
of	credit)	commit	the	Bank	to	make	payments	 on	behalf	of	
customers	 in	the	event	of	a	specific	 act,	generally	 related	
to	the	import	or	export	of	goods.	Guarantees	 and	standby	letters	of	credit	carry	a	similar	credit	risk	to	loans.	The	
nominal	values	of	such	commitments	are	listed	below.
Impairment losses on guarantees and other 
commitments
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount and 
the corresponding allowance for impairment losses in 
relation to guarantees and other commitments is, as 
follows:
Financial guarantees
The	table	below	shows	the	credit	quality	and	the	maximum	
exposure	and	year-end	stage	classificationNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
2020 2019
78
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCStage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total	
 Individual Individual Individual 
Financial	guarantees	 665,074,990		 	-				 	-					665,074,990	
Total outstanding exposure 665,074,990   -     -    665,074,990 
An	analysis	of	changes	in	the	gross	carrying	amount		in	relation	to	contingent	liabilities	is,	as	follows:
	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total	
 Individual Individual Collective 
Gross	carrying	amount	as	at	1	January	2020	 766,492,290		 	-				 	-					766,492,290	
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 	623,662,359		 	-				 		623,662,359	
Assets	derecognised	or	matured	(excluding	write	offs)	 (725,079,659)	 	-				 		(725,079,659)
Transfers	to	stage	1	 	-				 	-				 	 	-			
Transfers	to	stage	2	 	 	-				 	-				 -			
Transfers	to	stage	3	 	 	-				 	-				 	-			
Amounts	written	off	 	 	 	-				 	-			
Total outstanding exposure 665,074,990   -     -     665,074,990
32b. Impairment allowance for contingent liabilities
 2020	 2019 
 GH¢	 	GH¢	
Opening	balance	 4,309,506		 	5,959,016	
Charge	for	the	year	 (482,230.00)	 	(1,649,511)
Closing	stock	of	provision	 	3,827,276		 	4,309,506	
	 Stage	1	 Stage	2	 Stage	3	 	Total
 Individual Individual Collective
Gross	carrying	amount	as	at	1	January	2019.	 	4,309,506		 	-				 	-					4,309,506	
New	assets	originated	or	purchased	 	-				 	-				 	-			 	-
Assets	derecognised	or	matured	(excluding	write	offs)	 	(482,230)	 	-				 		(482,230)
Transfers	to	stage	1	 	 	-				 	-				 	-
Transfers	to	stage	2	 	 	-				 	-				 	-
Transfers	to	stage	3	 	 	-				 	-					 -
Amounts	written	off	 	 	-				 	-				 	-
At 31 December 2020  3,827,276   -     -     3,827,276Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
79
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC33. Legal liability 
Litigation is a common occurrence in the Banking 
industry	 due	to	the	nature	of	the	business	 undertaken.	
The Bank has formal controls and policies for managing 
legal	claims.	Once	professional	 advice	has	been	obtained	
and	the	amount	 of	loss	reasonably	 estimated,	 the	Bank	
makes	adjustments	 to	account	 for	any	adverse	 effects	
which	the	claims	may	have	on	its	financial	 standing.	 At	
year-end,	the	Bank	had	several	unresolved	legal	claims.
Adequate	 provision	 has	been	made	for	all	the	relevant	
litigation	 for	which	losses	may	be	probable.	 The	probable	
outﬂow	which	could	result	from	all	such	litigation,	 based	
on the current status of the various legal proceedings, is 
estimated	 to	be	no	more	than	GH¢	2,033,800		 while	the	
timing	of	the	outﬂow	is	uncertain.34. Analysis of financial assets and liabilities
Financial	 assets	and	liabilities	 are	measured	 on	an	on-
going	basis	either	at	fair	value	or	at	amortized	 cost.	The	
principal		 accounting	 policies		 in	Notes	2	describe	 how	
the	classes	of	financial	 instruments	 are	measured	 and	
how income and expenses, including fair value gains 
and	losses,	are	recognized.	 The	following	 table	analyses	
the	financial	 assets	and	liabilities	 in	the	statement	
of	financial	 position	 by	class	of	financial	 instrument	
to	which	they	are	assigned,	 and	therefore	 by	the	
measurement	basis:
Financial assets	 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 GH¢
Cash	&	cash	equivalents	 	-					1,561,983,616		 	-				 	-					1,561,983,616	
Non-pledged	trading	assets	 	67,896,476		 -	 -	 	-					67,896,476	
Investment	securities	 -		 -	 108,961,776		 	427,587,822		 	536,549,598	
Loans	and	advances	to	customers	 -		2,562,706,675		 -	 -		2,562,706,675	
Investments	(other	than	securities)	 	12,236,465		 -	 -	 	-					12,236,465	
Other	assets	 	-					66,511,519		 	-				 	-					66,511,519	
Total financial assets  80,132,941   4,191,201,810   108,961,776   427,587,822   4,807,884,349 
Total non-financial assets      307,322,003 
Total assets          5,115,206,352 Financial As -
sets at FVPL31 December 2020Loan and 
Advances at 
amortised 
costDebt
 Instrument 
Designated at 
FVOCIDebt 
Instrument 
at amortised 
costTotal Carrying 
Amount 
	 Deposits	from	banks	and	customers	 3,485,289,259		 	3,485,289,259	
	 Borrowings	 	366,266,787		 	366,266,787
	 Other	liabilities	 	338,055,417		 	338,055,417	
 Total financial liabilities 4,189,611,463   4,189,611,463 
 Total non-financial liabilities   925,594,889 
 Total liabilities and shareholders fund  5,115,206,352 
      Financial 
 Liabilities 
 Measured at  
 Amortised Cost 
 GH¢ 
Financial liabilitiesTotal 
Carrying 
Amount
 GH¢ Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
80
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC	 GH¢	 	GH¢		 GH¢	 	GH¢		 GH¢
Cash	&	cash	equivalents	 	-					1,295,640,731		 	-				 	-					1,295,640,731	
Non-pledged	trading	assets	 	57,523,936		 	-				 	-				 	-					57,523,936	
Investment	securities	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	83,104,992		 	83,104,992	
Loans	and	advances	to	customers	 	-					2,643,394,001		 	-				 	-					2,643,394,001	
Investments	(other	than	securities)	 	8,862,900		 	-				 	-				 	-				 	8,862,900	
Other	assets	 	-					62,514,235		 	-				 	-					62,514,235	
Total financial assets  66,386,836   4,001,548,967   -     83,104,992   4,151,040,795 
Total non-financial assets      292,868,414 
Total assets      4,443,909,209
The	fair	values	approximates	their	carrying	amounts.	Hence	no	further	disclosure	on	fair	values.Financial As -
sets at FVPL31 December 2019Loan and 
Advances at 
amortised 
costEquity 
Instrument 
Designated at 
FVOCIDebt 
Instrument 
at amortised 
costTotal Carrying 
Amount 
Deposits	from	banks	and	customers	 	3,195,381,361		 	3,195,381,361	
Borrowings	 177,695,977		 	177,695,977	
Other	liabilities	 233,119,110		 	233,119,110	
Total financial liabilities  3,606,196,448   3,606,196,448 
Total non-financial liabilities   837,712,761 
Total liabilities and shareholders fund   4,443,909,209 Financial 
 Liabilities 
 Measured at  
 Amortised Cost 
 GH¢ 
Financial liabilitiesTotal 
Carrying 
Amount
 GH¢ 
35. Determination of fair value and fair values hierarchy
the following hierarchy for determining and disclosing 
the	fair	value	of	financial	 instruments	 by	the	valuation	
technique:
 yLevel	1:	Quoted	 (unadjusted)	 prices	in	active	
markets	for	identical	assets	or	liabilities
 yLevel	2:	Other	techniques	 for	which	all	inputs	have	
a	significant	effect	on	the	recorded	fair
 yLevel	3:	Techniques	 for	which	inputs	have	a	
significant		 effect	on	the	recorded	 fair	value	that	are	
not	based	on	observable	market	data.	
Financial	 assets	and	liabilities	 measured	 using	a	
valuation	 technique	 based	on	assumptions	 that	are	
supported	 by	prices	from	observable	 current	 market	
transactions	 are	assets	and	liabilities	 for	which	pricing	is	
obtained	 via	pricing	services,	 but	where	prices	have	not	
been	determined	 in	an	active	market,	 financial	 assets	
with	fair	values	based	on	broker	codes,	investment	 in	
private	equity	funds	with	fair	values	obtained	 via	fund	managers and assets that are valued using the Bank’s 
own	models	 whereby	 the	majority	 of	assumptions	 are	
market	observable.
Non-market	 observable	 inputs	means	that	fair	values	
are determined in whole, or in parts, using a valuation 
technique,	 based	on	assumptions	 that	are	neither	
supported	 by	prices	from	observable	 current	 market	
transactions in the same instrument, nor are they 
based	on	available	 market	data.	The	main	asset	classes	
in this category are unlisted equity investments and 
debt	instruments.	 Valuation	 techniques	 are	used	to	
the	extent	that	observable	 inputs	are	not	available,	
thereby	 allowing	 for	situations	 in	which	there	is	little,	
if	any,	market	activity	 for	the	asset	or	liability	 at	the	
measurement	 date.	Therefore,		 observable	 inputs	reﬂect	
the	Bank’s	own	assumption	 	 about	the	assumptions	
that market participants will use in pricing the asset 
or	liability	 (including	 assumptions	 about	risk).	These	
inputs	are	developed	 based	on	the	best	information	
available	which	might	include	the	Bank’s	own	data.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Financial liabilities
81
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCThe	following	 table	shows	an	analysis	 of	financial	 instruments	 recorded	 at	fair	value	by	level	of	the	fair	value	hierarchy	 done	
on	a	recurring	basis.
 Note	 	Level	1		 	Level	2		 	Level	3		 Total
31  December  2020	 	 GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 GH¢
Non-pledged	trading	assets	 18	 	-					67,896,476		 	-				 	67,896,476	
Equity	investment	 19	 -		12,236,465		 	-				 	12,236,465	
Derivative	financial	assets	 	 -	 	-				 -	 	-			
land	and	building	 	 	 -		237,110,689		 	237,110,689	
     -  80,132,941   237,110,689   317,243,630 
31	December	2019	 	 		 			 			
Non-pledged	trading	assets	 18	 	-					57,523,936		 	-				 	57,523,936	
Equity	investment	 19	 	-				 	8,862,900		 	-				 	8,862,900	
Derivative	financial	assets	 	 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
land	and	building	 	 	-				 	-					246,289,239		 	246,289,239	
  -     66,386,836   246,289,239   312,676,075 
There	were	no	transfers	between	levels	1	and	2	within	the	period.
Level 2 valuation technique
The	assets	in	Level	2	comprise	 mainly	Government	 of	
Ghana	securities	 (Treasury	 Bills).	They	are	valued	using	
published	 results	of	tender	for	government	 of	Ghana	
and	Bank	of	Ghana	bill,	notes	and	bonds	at	the	financial	
year	end.
Level 3 valuation technique
The assets in Level 3 comprise revaluation gain on the 
Bank’s	fixed	assets.	Fair	value	of	the	properties	 was	
determined	 using	the	market	comparable	 method.	 The	
valuations	 have	been	performed	 by	the	valuer	and	are	
based	on	proprietary	 databases	 of	prices	of	transactions	
for	properties	of	similar	nature,	location	and	condition.
36. Financial risk management
Risk			is			inherent			 in			the			Bank’s			 activities			 but	is	
managed	 through	 a	process	 of	ongoing	 identification,	
measurement	 and	monitoring,	 subject	 to	risk	limits	
and	other	controls.	 This	process	 of	risk	management	 is	
critical	to	the	Bank’s	continuing	 profitability	 and	each	
individual	 within	the	Bank	is	accountable	 for	the	risk	
exposures	relating	to	his	or	her	responsibilities.
The Bank is exposed to credit risk, liquidity risk, interest 
rate	risk	and	market	risk.	It	is	also	subject	 to	various	
operating	risks.
The independent risk control process does not include 
business	 risks	such	as	changes	 in	the	environment,	
technology	 and	industry.	 The	Bank’s	policy	is	to	monitor	those	business	 risks	through	 the	Bank’s	 strategic	
planning	process.
Risk management structure
The		Board		of		Directors		 is		ultimately		 responsible	 for	
identifying	 and	controlling	 risks.	However,	 there	are	
separate	 independent	 bodies	responsible	 for	managing	
and	monitoring	risks.
Board of Directors
The	Board	of	Directors	 is	responsible	 for	the	overall	
risk management approach and for approving the risk 
management	strategies	and	principles.
Risk committees
The	Risk	Committees	 have	the	overall	responsibility	
for  the  development   of  the  risk  strategy   and 
implementing  principles, frameworks, policies and 
limits.	The	 	Risk	 	Committees	 	 are	 	responsible	 	 for	
managing	 risk	decisions	 and	monitoring	 risk	levels.	The	
main Risk Committees  and its frequency  of meetings 
are:
i.	Credit	Risk	Committee	-	Quarterly;
ii.	Asset	and	Liabilities	Committee	-	Weekly;
iii.	Structural	Risk	Committee	-	Quarterly;
iv.	Market	Risk	Committee	-	Quarterly;
v.	 Operational Risk Committee (Periodic and 
Permanent Control, Business Continuity Planning 
and	Compliance)	-	Quarterly.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
82
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCRisk management
Risk Management is done under specialists units of 
Credit and Market Risk Department and Operational 
and	Permanent	 Control	 Division.	 These	units	are	
responsible	 for	implementing	 and	maintaining	 risk	
related procedures to ensure independent control 
process	 is	maintained.Societe	 Generale	 Ghana	Risk	is	
managed	 through	 a	process	 of	ongoing	 identification,	
measurement	 and	monitoring,	 subject	to	risk	limits	and	
other	controls.
This process of risk management is critical to the Bank’s 
continuing	 profitability	 and	each	individual	 within	the	
Bank	is	accountable	 for	the	risk	exposures	 relating	 to	
his	or	her	responsibilities.	 The	Bank	is	exposed	 to	credit	
risk,	liquidity	 and	interest	 rate	risk	and	market	risk.	It	is	
also	subject	to	various	operating	 risks.	The	independent	
risk	control	 process	 does	not	include	 business	 risks	
such as changes in the environment, technology and 
industry.	 The	Bank’s	policy	is	to	monitor	 those	business	
risks	through	the	Bank’s	strategic	planning	process.
Risk control
Risk Control is done under the various specialist units 
of Risk Management where monitoring of compliance 
with risk principles, policies and limits across the Bank 
is	undertaken.	 Each	business	 group	has	its	own	unit	
which	is	responsible	 for	the	independent	 control	risks,	
including monitoring the risk of exposures against 
limits and the assessment of risks of new products and 
structured	 transactions.	 These	units	also	ensure		 the	
complete capture of the risk in risk measurement and 
reporting systems through the various committees to 
the	Board.
Bank treasury
The	Bank’s	Treasury	 is	responsible	 for	managing	 the	
Bank’s	assets	and	liabilities	 and	the	overall	financial	
structure.	 It	is	also	primarily	 responsible	 for	the	funding	
and	liquidity	risks	management	of	the	Bank.
Internal control systems
The	bank	has	in	place	internal	 control	 systems	
and mechanisms aimed at ensuring that legal and 
regulatory provisions, ethics, and professional practices 
are	complied	 with,	internal	 processes	 of	the	bank	are	
functioning	 properly	 and	the	financial	 information	 are	
reliable.	 The	system	is	particularly	 designed	 to	identify	
malfunctions	 and	irregularities,	 to	efficiently	 control	
risks, and to make sure that information systems are 
reliable.	 Internal	 control	system	distinguishes	 two	levels	
of	control:	 Permanent	 Control	which	forms	the	first	level	
of control and Periodic Controls as a second level of 
control.
Permanent	 Control	 is	essential	 for	the	bank’s	internal	
control	 structure	 and	is	defined	 as	all	procedures		
implemented	 on	a	permanent	 basis	to	guarantee	 that	
operations carried out on an operational level are correctly	 handled,	 secure	and	valid.	It	is	based	on	day-
to-day	security,	 which	is	everyone’s	 responsibility	 and	
on	formal	supervision	carried	out	by	management.	
Periodic	 control	activities	 are	performed	 by	dedicated	
and specialized teams of auditors which are independent 
from	the	operational	 entities.	 The	scope	of	Periodic	
Controls	 encompasses	 all	the	bank’s	activities	 and	can	
focus on any aspect of these activities, without any 
restrictions.
Internal audit
The Bank’s policy is that risk management processes 
throughout	 the	Bank	are	audited	annually	 by		the		internal		
audit		function,		 which		examines	 both		the		adequacy		
of  the  procedures  and  the Bank’s compliance with 
the	procedures.	 Internal	 Audit		discusses		 the		results		
of  all  assessments with management,  and reports its  
findings	and	recommendations	to	the	Audit	Committee.
The	most	significant	 risks	which	the	bank	is	exposed	 to	
and	how	they	are	managed	are	as	below:
Credit risk
Credit risk is the risk that the Bank will incur a loss 
because	 its	customers	 or	counterparties	 fail	to	discharge	
their	contractual	obligations.
The	Bank	manages	 and	controls	 credit	risk	by	setting	
limits on the amount of risk it is willing to accept for 
individual  counterparties  and for geographical and 
industry	 concentrations,	 and	by	monitoring	 exposures	
in	relation	to	such	limits.
The Bank also manages its counter party risk through 
adherence	 to	Bank	of	Ghana	prudential	 requirements	 by	
ensuring	 that	it’s	secured	 lending	to	any	single	borrower	
is	below	25%	of	its	net	worth	and	that	any	single	
unsecured	 lending	 by	the	bank	is	less	than	10%	of	the	
bank’s	net	worth.
The framework for managing this risk is the credit policy 
which spells out the overall underwriting standards, 
credit approval process, credit administration and 
recovery	 processes.	 The	policy	is	reviewed	 from	time	to	
time	(at	least	yearly)	in	response	 to	risk	profile	of	new	
business	 opportunities/products,		 and		any		challenges		
with		the		recovery	process.
The	Bank	has	established	 a	credit	quality	 review	
process through the Credit Committee to provide 
early	 	identification	 of	 	possible	 	 changes	 in	 	the	
creditworthiness  of  counterparties,  including regular 
collateral	 revisions.	 Counterparty	 limits	are	established	
by	the	use	of	a	credit	risk	classification	 system,	 which	
assigns	major	counterparty	a	risk	rating.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
83
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCRisk	ratings	are	subject	to	regular	revision.
The  credit  quality  review  process  aims  to  allow the 
Bank to assess the potential loss as a result of the risks 
to	which	it	is	exposed	and	take	corrective	action.
The	Bank’s	credit	quality	review	process	 is	established			
in  line  with   the  Societe   Generale Group’s risk 
management	governance	based	on	the	following;
 y A strong managerial involvement throughout the 
entire	organization:	 From	the	Board	of	Directors	
through to the Credit Committee and to the 
operational	field	management	teams.
 y A  tight framework  of internal procedures  and 
guidelines.
 yA	well	defined	permanent	 supervision		 process	that	
assists to identify through a self examination the 
need for review of certain processes to improve on 
the	Bank’s	credit	delivery	and	collection	processes.
 y Independence  of Risk assessment department 
from	the	business	divisions;
 y A consistent approach to risk assessment and 
monitoring	applied	throughout	the	Group.
The	bank	in	estimating	 and	establishing	 its	potential	credit	losses,	counterparty	 limits	are	established	 by	the	
use	of	a	credit	risk	classification	 system,	 which	assigns	
major	counterparties	 a	risk	rating.	Risk	ratings	 are	
subject	to	regular	revision.
The  credit  quality  review  process  aims  to  allow the 
bank	to	assess	the	potential	 loss	as	a	result	of	the	risks	to	
which	it	is	exposed	and	take	corrective	action.
The Credit Committee also monitors the portfolio of 
loans	and	debt	collection	operations.
 yanalyze	 the	portfolio	 of	loans:	retail	customers,	
companies,	 banks	and	financial	 institutions	 and	
sovereign,
 y monitor irregular commitments  and the main 
sensitive risks,
 ymonitor	debt	collection		files,
 y assess guarantees and monitor provisions,
 y ensure  that the actions reported are monitored 
and performed
Using	provisions	 made	on	facilities	 above	90	days,	the	
credit	risk	exposure	 for	the	bank	is	considered	 to	be	
stable	over	a	three	year	period.
Maximum credit exposure
  2020		 2019	 
  GH¢		 GH¢
Due	from	bank	and	other	financial	institution	 	921,536,236		 	739,187,696	
Non-pledged	trading	assets	 	67,896,476		 	57,523,936	
Debt	instruments		at		amortised		cost		 	427,587,822		 	83,104,992	
Loans	and	advances		 	2,825,769,351		 	2,944,425,788	
Unsecured	contingent	liabilities	and	commitments	 	665,074,990		 	766,492,290	
 4,907,864,875   4,590,734,702
Fair value of collateral held
The Bank holds collateral against loans and advances to customers in the form of mortgage interests over property, other 
registered	securities	over	assets,	and	guarantees.		Estimates	of	fair	value	are	based	on	the	value	of	collateral	assessed	at	
the	time	of	borrowing,	and	generally	are	not	updated	except	when	a	loan	is	individually	assessed	as	impaired.
An	estimate	of	the	fair	value	of	collateral	and	other	security	enhancements	held	against	financial	assets	is	shown	below:	
  2020		 	2019	 
 GH¢		 GH¢
Against	impaired	assets	 299,019,226		 	574,949,924	
Against	past	due	but	not	impaired	assets	 	75,009,807		 	29,275,047	
  374,029,033   604,224,971Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
84
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCLiquidity risk and structural interest rate risk
Liquidity risk
Liquidity	risk	arises	from	the	mismatch	of	the	timing	of	cash	ﬂows	relating	to	assets	and	liabilities.	The	liquidity	policy	of	
the	Bank	is	approved	by	the	Board	under	guidelines	issued	by	Societe	Generale	Group	and	monitored	daily	to	ensure	that	
its	funding	requirements	can	be	met	at	all	times	and	that	a	stock	of	high	quality	liquid	assets	is	maintained.
The	net	liquidity	gap	resulting	from	liquidity	analysis	of		assets		and		liabilities		of		the		Bank		as		of		31		December		2020			is	
shown	in	the	table	below.
Maturity analysis of assets and liabilities
The	table	shows	a	summary	of	assets	and	liabilities	analysed	according	to	their	undiscounted	contractual	terms	of	the	
transactions	and	models	of	historic	client	behaviour	as	well	as	conventional	assumptions	for	some	balance	sheet	items.
	 	 Below	3	 	3	to	6		 	6	to	12		 Above	1
As	at	31		December		2020	 Total	 months	 	months		 	months		 year
	 GH¢	 GH¢	 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 GH¢
Assets   
Cash	and	cash	equivalents	 	1,561,983,616		 	1,561,983,616		 -	 -	 -
Non-pledged	trading	assets	 67,896,476		 	67,896,476		 -	 -	 -
Debt	instruments		at	fair	value	through	other	comprehensive	income	 108,961,776		 -	 -	 -		 108,961,776	
Investment	securities	 	427,587,822		 		353,201,522		 		13,109,189		 		29,284,201		 		31,992,910	
Loans	and	advances	to	customers	 2,562,706,675		 	435,599,801		 	454,323,741		 	422,650,850		 	1,250,132,283	
Equity	investments		 12,236,465		 -	 -	 -		12,236,465	
Other	assets	 	66,511,519		 	41,499,925		 	19,453,462		 	5,558,132		
Property,	plant	and	equipment	 290,748,100		 -	 -	 -		290,748,100	
Intangible	assets	 	1,264,470		 -	 -	 -		1,264,470	
Deferred	tax	assets	 	15,309,433		 	15,309,433		 -	 -	 -
Total assets 5,115,206,352   2,504,991,350   487,034,445   456,849,171   1,666,331,386
Liabilities
Deposits	from	banks	 	3,945,938		 	3,945,938		 -	 -	 -
Deposits	from	customers	 	3,481,343,321		 	990,495,465		 	641,908,961		 	458,440,299		 	1,390,498,596	
Borrowings	 	366,266,787		 	3,168,110		 	3,214,257		 	6,382,367		 	353,502,054	
Current	tax	liabilities	 	25,752,524		 	25,752,524		 -	 -	 -
Other	liabilities	 	312,302,893		 	93,690,868		 	93,690,868		 	124,921,157		 -
Total liabilities  4,189,611,463   1,117,052,905   738,814,085   589,743,822   1,744,000,650 
Net liquidity gap  925,594,889   1,387,938,444   (251,779,641)  (132,894,651)  (77,669,264)
Contingent liabilities  665,076,000   447,272,834   101,719,762   89,965,055   26,118,349Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
85
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC	 	 Below	3	 	3	to	6		 	6	to	12		 Above	1
As	at	31	December	2019	 Total	 months	 	months		 	months		 year
	 GH¢	 GH¢	 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 GH¢
Assets
Cash	and	cash	equivalents	 	1,295,640,731		 	1,295,640,731		 	-				 	-				 	-			
Non-pledged	trading	assets	 	57,523,936		 	57,523,936		 	-				 	-				 	-			
Investment	securities	 	83,104,992		 	68,076,322		 	1,296,058		 	4,512,754		 	9,219,858	
Loans	and	advances	to	customers	 	2,643,394,001		 	617,908,437		 	277,294,575		 	401,872,213		 	1,346,318,776	
Equity	investments		 	8,862,900		 	-				 	-				 	-				 	8,862,900	
Other	assets	 	62,514,235		 	43,760,159		 	12,502,717		 	6,251,359		 	-			
Property,	plant	and	equipment	 	290,868,619		 	-				 	-				 	-					290,868,619	
Intangible	assets	 	1,728,565		 	-				 	-				 	-				 	1,728,565	
Deferred	tax	assets	 	271,230		 	271,230		 	-				 	-				 	-			
Total assets  4,443,909,209   2,083,180,815   291,093,350   412,636,326   1,656,998,718
Liabilities
Deposits	from	banks	 	25,675,390		 	25,675,390		 	-				 	-				 	-			
Deposits	from	customers	 	3,169,705,971		 	1,213,120,562		 	399,472,352		 	404,940,300		 	1,152,172,757	
Borrowings	 	177,695,977		 	144,504,706		 	33,191,271		 	-				 	-			
Other	liabilities	 	233,119,110		 	139,613,341		 	69,935,733		 	23,570,036		 	-			
Deferred	tax	liabilities	 	35,751,330		 	35,751,330		 	-				 	-				 	-			
Total	liabilities	 	3,641,947,778		 	1,558,665,329		 	502,599,356		 	428,510,336		 	1,152,172,757	
Net	liquidity	gap	 	801,961,431		 	524,515,486		 	(211,506,006)	 	(15,874,010)	 	504,825,961	
Contingent liabilities   766,492,290   595,217,953   31,949,919   124,708,771   14,615,647
The	gap	profile	is	the	difference	 between	 assets	and	liabilities	 which	is	calculated	 for	each	time-	bucket.	The	results	of	this	
calculation	are	stressed	and	analysed	through	the	internal	ALM	Report	or	the	Group	report	Structural	risk	committee.
Societe	Generale	 Ghana	PLC	has	a	large	and	diversified	 deposit	 base	which	serves	as	a	large	part	of	mid	and	long-term	
financing	resources.
Contractual maturities of undiscounted cash flows of financial assets and liabilities
The	table	shows	a	summary	 of	financial	 assets	and	liabilities	 analysed	 according	 to	their	undiscounted	 contractual	 terms	
of	the	transactions	 and	models	of	historic	client	behaviour	 (models	 determined	 with	the	contribution	 of	the	Group),	as	well	
as	conventional	assumptions	for	some	balance	sheet	items.
As at 31  December  2020	 	 Below	3	 	3	to	6		 	6	to	12		 Above	1
 Total months  months   months  year
	 GH¢	 GH¢	 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 GH¢
Financial assets
Cash	and	cash	equivalents	 		1,561,983,616		 	1,561,983,616		 -	 -
Non-pledged	trading	assets	 		67,896,476		 	67,896,476		 -	 -
	 		108,961,776		 -	 -	 108,961,776	
Investment	securities	 	488,740,938		 	437,006,335		 	15,150,438		 	33,049,554		 	3,534,611	
Loans	and	advances	to	customers	 	2,859,413,075		 	451,684,323		 	487,875,549		 	485,076,381		 	1,434,776,821	
Equity	investments		 	12,236,465		 -	 -	 -		12,236,465	
Total financial assets  5,099,232,346   2,518,570,750   503,025,987   518,125,935   1,559,509,674
Financial liabilities     
Deposits	from	banks	 -		3,945,938		 	3,945,938		 -	 -
Deposits	from	customers	 	3,538,538,820		 	1,022,353,891		 	661,940,918		 	463,745,415		 	1,390,498,596	
Borrowings	 	370,474,208		 	-					7,727,987		 	7,587,228		 	355,158,992	
Total financial liabilities  3,912,958,966   1,026,299,829   669,668,905   471,332,643   1,745,657,588Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
86
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCAs	at	31	December	2019	 		 Below	3		 	3	to	6		 	6	to	12		 Above	1
  Total   months   months   months  year
	 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 GH¢
Financial assets     
Cash	and	cash	equivalents	 	1,295,640,731		 	1,295,640,731		 	-				 	-				 	-			
Non-pledged	trading	assets	 	57,523,935		 	57,523,935		 	-				 	-				 	-			
Investment	securities	 	95,754,709		 	78,093,686		 	1,489,699		 	5,240,842		 	10,930,482	
Loans	and	advances	to	customers	 	2,972,249,910		 	642,794,699		 	299,630,653		 	466,613,827		 	1,563,210,731	
Equity	investments		 	8,862,900		 	-				 	-				 	-				 	8,862,900	
Derivative	asset		 	-				 	-				 	-				 	-			
Total	financial	assets	 	4,430,032,185		 	2,074,053,051		 	301,120,352		 	471,854,669		 	1,583,004,113	
Financial	liabilities	 	 	 	 	
Deposits	from	banks	 	25,675,390		 	25,675,390		 	-				 	-				 	-			
Deposits	from	customers	 	3,228,781,977		 	1,257,691,057		 	410,390,516		 	408,527,647		 	1,152,172,757	
Borrowings	 	182,921,653		 	116,788,312		 	12,581,684		 	7,101,827		 	46,449,830	
Total financial liabilities  3,437,379,020   1,400,154,759   422,972,200   415,629,474   1,198,622,587
Structural interest rate 
The interest rate risk is the incurred risk in case of  interest  
rate		variations		 because		 of		all		on-and	off-	financial	
position	 operations,	 	 except	operations	 subject	 to	
market	risks.	Global	Interest	 Rate	Risk	is	corresponding	
to	interest	rate	on	the	banking	portfolio.
The strategic management of liquidity is done at a high 
level	of	senior	management	 (ALCO);	 review	of	results	
on	weekly	basis	in	line	with	competition	 and	economic	
conditions and also ensure that regulatory requirements 
are	met.
The	risk	management	 is	supervised	 by	the	Group.	Limits	
are	defined	 at	Group	consolidated	 level	and	at	the	level	
of	each	Group	consolidated	 entity,	and	are	validated	 by	
the	Credit	Risk	Committee.	 Finance	 department	 of	the	
Group	is	responsible	 for	checking	 the	risk	level	of	Societe	
Generale	Ghana	PLC.
Societe Generale Ghana PLC’s main aim is to reduce 
its exposure to structural interest rate risk as much as 
possible.	 To	this	end,	any	residual	 interest	 rate	risk	
exposure	 must	comply	with	the	sensitivity	 limits	set	by	
the	Finance	 Committee.	 The	sensitivity	 is	defined	 as	
the variation in the present value of future (maturities 
of	up	to	20	years)	residual	 fixed	rate	positions	 (surplus	
or	deficits)	 for	a	1%	parallel	 increase	 in	the	yield	curve	
(i.e.	this	sensitivity	 does	not	relate	to	the	sensitivity	
of	annual	net	interest	 income).	 The	limit	for	Societe	
Generale	Ghana	PLC	is		within	the	range	of		EUR	-1.1	and		5.9	million	(i.e.	between	 GH¢	-5.83	and		31.25	million)		
This	limit	is		-1.12%		and		6.02%	of	shareholders’	 equity	
in	reference	to	the	lower	and	upper	limits	respectively.
In order to quantify its exposure to structural interest 
rate risks,  Societe Generale Ghana PLC analyses all  
fixed-	rate	assets	and	liabilities	 on	future	maturities	
to	identify	 any	gaps.		These	positions	 come	from	their	
maturities.
Once	the	Bank	has	identified	 the	gaps	of	its	fixed-	rate	
positions	 (surplus	 or	deficit),	it		calculates	 the	sensitivity	
(as	defined	 above)	to	variations	 in	interest	 rates.	This	
sensitivity	 is	defined	 as	the	variation	 of	the	net	present	
value	of	the	fixed-rate	 positions	 for	an	instantaneous	
parallel	increase	of	1%	of	the	yield	curve.
Interest rate risk exposure
Interest rate risk exposure  is the risk that the fair value 
or	future	cash	 ﬂows	 of	a	financial	 instrument	 will	
ﬂuctuate	 because	 of	changes	 in	market	interest	 rates.	
The Bank’s exposure to the risk of changes in market 
interest	 rates	relates	primarily	 to	the	financial	 assets	
and	liabilities	 	 with	variable/ﬂoating	 interest	 rates.	
The	following	 table	demonstrates	 the	sensitivity	 to	a	
reasonable	 possible	 change	 in	interest	 rates,	with	all	
other	variable	 held	constant,	 of	the	Bank’s	profit	before	
tax	(through	 the	impact	on	the	ﬂoating	 rate	financial	
assets	and	liabilities).Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
87
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC 
USD		 	+1%		 	-1%		 	8,996,743		 	(8,996,743)	 	6,297,720		 	(6,297,720)
	EURO		 	+1%		 	-1%		 	1,316,850		 	(1,316,850)	 	921,795		 	(921,795)
	GH¢		 	+1%		 	-1%		 	17,937,903		 	(17,937,903)	 	12,556,532		 	(12,556,532)
31	December		 2019	 	 2019	 	 	 2019
USD	 +1%	 	-1%		 	8,205,816		 	(8,205,816)	 	5,744,071		 	(5,744,071)
EURO	 +1%	 	-1%		 	1,655,825		 	(1,655,825)	 	1,159,078		 	(1,159,078)
GH¢	 +1%	 	-1%		 	19,582,617		 	(19,582,617)	 	13,707,832		 	(13,707,832)
Market risk
Market	risk	is	the	risk	of	losses	being	incurred	 as	a	result	
of adverse movements in interest or exchange rates and 
arises	in	the	Bank’s	treasury	activities.
Market	 risk	is	controlled	 by	interest	 mismatch	 and	
foreign	currency	 open	position	 limits	approved	 by	the	
Executive	 Committee	 of	the	Bank	and	monitored	 daily.	
The foreign currency exposure analysis of the Bank is 
shown	in	the	currency	exposure	table	below.
This	risk	is	managed	 by	the	establishment	 of	limits,	
monitoring	 of	exposures	 on	a	daily	basis	and	ensuring	
that	regulatory	requirements	are	met.
The	task	of	the	Market	Risk	Committee	is	to:
 y identify,  assess and monitor the market risks 
generated	by	transactions	made	on	behalf	of:
 y the local Financial department (cash,  liquid assets,  
balance		 sheet		hedging)	 in	relation	 with	the	Assets	
and	Liabilities	Management	Committee
 y professional customers (companies and 
institutional investors) ydefine	and	monitor	alert	procedures
 ymake	sure	that	the	Back	Office	is	really	
independent	of		the	Front	Office.
Exchange rate sensitivity analysis
The Bank’s foreign exchange exposures comprise trading 
and	non-trading	 foreign	currency	 translation	 exposures.		
Foreign exchange exposures are principally derived 
from	customer	 driven	transactions.	 	 The	sensitivity	
rates used represents management’s assessment of 
the	reasonably	 possible	 change	 in	foreign	 exchange	
rates.	The	sensitivity	 analysis	 includes	 only	outstanding	
foreign currency denominated monetary items and 
adjusts	 their	translation	 at	the	period	end	for	the	
changes	 in	foreign	currency	 rates.	A	positive	 number	
below	indicates	 an	increase	 in	Profit	or	Equity	whilst	a	
negative	 number	 indicates	 a	decrease	 in	Profit	or	Equity.	
The	profits	below	are	the	result	of	a	net	long	exposure	
in the foreign currency coupled with an increase in the 
foreign	currency	 rate.	The	losses	on	the	other	hand	are	
mainly due to a net long exposure in the foreign currency 
coupled	with		a	decrease	in	the	foreign	currency	rate.
	 	 	 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 GH¢
USD	 +1%	 -1%	 	(181,787)	 	181,787		 	(127,251)	 	127,251	
GBP	 +1%	 -1%	 	6,777		 	(6,777)	 	4,744		 	(4,744)
EUR	 +1%	 -1%	 	(219,505)	 	219,505		 	(153,654)	 	153,654	
Other	currencies	 +1%	 -1%	 	11,960		 	(11,960)	 	8,372		 	(8,372)Increase/decrease 
in basis points 
 2020 Increase/decrease 
in basis points 
 2020 31 December
Effect on profit  
before tax 
 2020 Effect on profit  
before tax 
 2020 
Effect on equity 
 2020 Effect on equity 
 2020 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
88
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC	 		 	 GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 GH¢
USD	 +1%	 -1%	 	(197,179)	 	197,179		 	(138,026)	 	138,026	
GBP	 +1%	 -1%	 	25,276		 	(25,276)	 	17,693		 	(17,693)
EUR	 +1%	 -1%	 	(183,167)	 	183,167		 	(128,217)	 	128,217	
Other	currencies	 +1%	 -1%	 	20,016		 	(20,016)	 	14,011		 	(14,011)
The following methods and assumptions used in the computation of sensitivity analysis
i.	Foreign	currency	exposure	is	assumed	to	remain	at	constant	values	(closing	balances	at	the	end	of	the	year).
ii.	Use	of	average	exchange	rate	for	the	year	under	consideration.
iii.	Use	of	pre-determined	stress	levels	(relevant	range	of	stress	level)	based	on	extreme	or	worst	case	scenarios.
iv.	There	are	no	changes	in	the	methods	and	assumptions	from	the	previous	periods.
v.	The	current	corporate	tax	rate	is	applied	in	determining	the	effect	on	profit	and	equity.
Currency risk
Currency	 risk	is	the	risk	that	the	value	of	a	financial	 instrument	 will	ﬂuctuate	 due	to	changes	 in	foreign	exchange	 rates.	In	
Ghana,	market	activities	 is	mostly	affected	 by		movements	 in	the	dollar.	The	cedi	has	depreciated	 consistently	 over	the	last	
three	years.	The	Statement	 Of	Financial	 position		 of		SG	Ghana	is	structured	 to	take	the	upside	of	such	a	depreciating	 trend.	
The	currency	 risk	of	the	bank	has	been	stable	over	a	three	year	period.SG	 Ghana	manages	 currency	 risk	by	monitoring	 the	
open	currency	 positions	 on	a	daily	basis.	The	objective	 of	monitoring	 the	open	position	 in	foreign	currency	 is	to	manage	
foreign	exchange	 risk	due	to	movements	 in	rates	as	well	as	changes	 in	liquidity	 positions.	 The	bank	has	adopted	 the	Bank	
of	Ghana	requirement	 that	banks	maintain	 a	total	open	position	 which	is	not	more	than	10%	of	their	net	worth.	Within	this	
limit,	banks	are	also	required	 to	maintain	 single	currency	 open	positions	 not	more	than	5%	of	net	worth.		The	bank	uses	the	
mid	revaluation	 rates	published	 by	the	Bank	of	Ghana	at	the	end	of	each	working	 day.	The	year	end	rates	used	for	foreign	
exchange	translations	of	the	major	currencies	are	as	follows:	USD	-	5.7602,	EUR	-	7.0643	and	GBP	-	7.8742.
Currency exposure
The	table	below	summarises	 the	Bank’s	exposure	 to	foreign	exchange	 rate	risks	at	year-	end.	The	amounts	 stated	in	the	
table	are	the	cedi	equivalent	of	the	foreign	currencies.Increase/decrease 
in basis points 
 2020 Effect on profit  
before tax 
 2020 Effect on equity 
 2020 
31		December		2020	 	 	 	 	 	 	
	 	 USD	 GBP	 	EURO		 	Others		 Total
	 	 GH¢	 GH¢	 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 GH¢
Assets      
Cash	and	balances	with	bank	of	ghana		 	 	6,911,313		 	5,241,501		 	6,205,637		 	-				 	18,358,451	
	Due	from	other	banks	and	financial	institutions		 	712,537,223		 	21,644,828		 	297,829,013		 	1,221,934		 	1,033,232,997	
	Other	assets		 	 	680		 	-				 	0		 	40		 	721	
	Loan	and	advances	to	customers		 	 	899,674,319		 	383		 	131,684,968		 	-					1,031,359,670	
 Total assets    1,619,123,534   26,886,711   435,719,618   1,221,974   2,082,951,838Increase/decrease 
in basis points 
 2019 Effect on profit  
before tax 
 2019 Effect on equity 
 2019 31 DecemberNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
89
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCLiabilities 
	 	 USD	 GBP	 	EURO		 	Others		 Total
	 	 GH¢	 GH¢	 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 GH¢
Due	to	other	banks	and	financial	institutions		 	338,987,770		 	-					24,725,050		 	-					363,712,820	
	Due	to	customers		 	 	1,158,019,032		 	25,036,008		 	246,159,468		 	25,948		 	1,429,240,457	
	Other	liabilities		 	 	71,173,055		 	1,173,006		 	187,475,690		 	-					259,821,751	
 Total liabilities 	 	 	1,568,179,857		 	26,209,014		 	458,360,208		 	25,948		 	2,052,775,028	
Net on balance sheet position 	 	 	50,943,677		 	677,697		 	(22,640,590)	 	1,196,026		 	30,176,810	
Net off balance sheet position		 	 	(69,122,400)	 	-				 	690,067		 	-					(68,432,333)
Net open position    (18,178,723)  677,697   (21,950,523)  1,196,026   (38,255,522)
31	December	2019	 	 	 	 	 	 	
	 	 USD	 GBP	 	EURO		 	Others		 Total
	 	 GH¢	 GH¢	 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 GH¢
Assets
Cash	and	balances	with	bank	of	ghana		 	 	6,852,179		 	3,013,824		 	3,674,457		 	-					13,540,460	
	Due	from	other	banks	and	financial	institutions		 	599,859,111		 	22,886,210		 	127,399,835		 	1,869,587		 	752,014,743	
	Other	assets		 	 	654		 	269		 	-				 	-				 	923	
	Loan	and	advances	to	customers		 	 	723,370,158		 	358		 	159,512,834		 	-					882,883,350	
Total assets    1,330,082,102   25,900,661   290,587,126   1,869,587   1,648,439,476 
	Liabilities		 	 	 	 	 	
Due	to	other	banks	and	financial	institutions		 	148,630,151		 	-					27,951,075		 	-					176,581,226	
	Due	to	customers		 	 	1,136,169,312		 	22,512,871		 	145,087,337		 	22,771		 	1,303,792,291	
	Other	liabilities		 	 	38,893,330		 	860,133		 	146,331,188		 	361		 	186,085,012	
Total liabilities    1,323,692,793   23,373,004   319,369,600   23,132   1,666,458,529 
Net on balance sheet position    6,389,309   2,527,657   (28,782,474)  1,846,455   (18,019,053)
Net off balance sheet position    (37,075,790)  -     708,737   -     (36,367,053)
Net open position    (30,686,481)  2,527,657   (28,073,737)  1,846,455   (54,386,106)
Operational risk
Operational	 risk	is	the	exposure	 to	financial	 or	other	damage	
arising through unforeseen events or failure in operational 
processes	 and	systems.	 Examples	 include	inadequate	 controls	
and	procedures,	 human	 error,	deliberate	 malicious	 acts	
including	fraud	and	business	interruption.
Operational procedures are documented in an Operations 
Manual.
The			Bank			has			established			 and			implemented	 an	integrated	
Operational Risk (OR) framework comprising (i) Loss Collection 
policy, (ii) Key Risk Indicators (KRI) policy, (iii) Permanent 
Supervision	 policy,	(iv)	Compliance	 and	anti-	money	laundering.	
Policy which set out the organizational structure, overall policy 
framework, processes and systems for identifying, assessing, 
monitoring	 and	controlling/	 mitigating	 operational	 risks	in	the	
bank.
Societe Generale Ghana PLC has adopted the Societe Generale Group BCP policy and methodology which is consistent with 
international	standards.
The Bank has also created a comprehensive and independent 
review of the Business Continuity Planning and Operational 
Risk	processes.
The Operational Risk Committee’s task is to identify and assess 
the impact of operational risks on the smooth running and 
profitability	 of	the	bank,	and	to	define	and	implement	 the	
strategy	 used	to	control	them	by	continuously	 adapting	 the	
methods	 used	to	bring	them	into	conformity	 with	regulations	 in	
force	and	Societe	Generale	Group	standards.
To	achieve	this,	the	committee:
 ymakes	sure	that	the	resources	 made	available	 to	the	
Operational Risk team are in line with the Bank’s level of 
exposure.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
90
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC yis	responsible	 for	the	introduction	 and	satisfactory	
operation of permanent supervision, and for the 
bank’s	Operational	Risk	control.
 y is  informed of the main types of operational risks 
and of the main operating losses recorded over the 
period.
 y monitors  the implementation of plans of action 
intended	to	correct	and	reduce	Operational	Risks.
 yvalidates	 the	findings	 of	regulatory	 	 exercises	
(Risk	&	Control	 Self	Assessment	 (RCSA),	 scenario	
analysis, KRI), introduces and monitors corrective 
action	plans.
 y introduces, maintains and tests the BCP and the 
Crisis	management	system.
 ymakes	sure	that	the	work	done	by	Permanent	
Supervision is of good quality and approves its 
report.
 y takes corrective action in the event of a deterioration 
in	the	control	environment.
 y keeps up to date with legislative and regulatory 
changes, as well as recommendations relating to 
periodic	control.
 ydrafts	and	presents	 its	activity	 report	particularly	
intended	for	the	Audit	and	Accounts	Committee.
Non compliance & reputation risk and the prevention 
of money laundering
The compliance function ensures that the risks of legal, 
administrative	 and/or	disciplinary	 penalties,	 financial	
losses	or	injury	to	reputation,	 arising	out	of	or	in	
connection with failure to comply with local legislative 
and/or	 regulatory	 banking	 provisions,	 ethics	and	
professional practices, as well as Societe Generale Group 
instructions,	 standards	 and/or	processes	 are	identified	
and	controlled.	 Using	incidence	 of	non	compliance	 and	
fines,	the	risk	of	non	compliance	 has	been	stable	over	a	
three	year	period.
The	bank’s	compliance	 activity	is	overseen	 at	a	high	level	
by	a	senior	management	 officer,		the	Head	of	Compliance	
and	through	 the	Compliance	 committee	 chaired	by	the	
Managing	Director.
The	main	tasks	of	the	compliance	function	are	namely:
 yto	define	in	accordance	 with		legal		and	regulatory	
requirements, the policies, principles and  
procedures	 applicable	 to	compliance	 and	the	
prevention of money laundering and terrorist 
financing	and	ensure	that	they	are	implemented. yto	ensure	that	professional	 and	financial	 market	
regulations	are	respected.
 yto	prevent	 and	manage	 any	potential	 conﬂicts	 of	
interest	with	respect	to	customers.
 yto	train	and	advise	 staff	and	increase	 their	
awareness	of	compliance	issues.
37. Regulatory breaches
During	the	year	under	review,	the	bank		breached		 four		
sections	 of	the	Specialised	 Deposit	 -Taking	Instiutuions		
Act,	2016		(Act	930).	The	Bank	was	levied	an	amount	 of	
GH¢	677,799.94	 in	accordance	 with	the	relevant	 sections	
of	the	act.
38. Segmental  reporting
For	management	 purposes,	 the	bank	is	organized	
broadly	 	 into	three	 	operating	 segments	 based	on	
products	and	services	as	follows;
 yRetail	Banking	 	 -	This	unit	primarily	 serves	the	
needs of individuals, high net worth clients, 
institutional	 clients	and	very	small	businesses.	 It	
is	principally	 responsible	 for	providing	 loans	and	
other	credit	facilities,	 as	well	as	mobilizing	 deposits	
and	providing	other	transactions.
 yCorporate	 Banking	 	 -This	unit	is	principally	
responsible	 for	providing	 loans	and	other	
credit	facilities,	 as	well	as	mobilizing	 deposits	
and providing other transactions to the Bank’s 
corporate	clients.
 yTreasury		 -This	unit	undertakes	 the	bank’s	funding	
activities.	 It	also	manages	 the	liquidity	 position	 of	
the	Bank	through	 activities	 such	as	borrowings,	
and	investing	 in	liquid	assets	such	as	short-term	
placements	and	government	debt	securities.
Management monitors the operating results of each 
business	 units	separately	 for	the	purpose	 of	making	
decisions	 about	resource	 allocation	 and	performance	
assessment.	 Segment	 performance	 is	evaluated	 based	
on	operating	 profit	or	loss	which	in	certain	respects	 is	
measured	 differently	 from	operating	 profit	or	loss	in	the	
financial	 statements.	 The	main	source	of	difference	 is	
the use of a transfer pricing mechanism in apportioning 
investment	income	for	the	segment.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
91
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC31  December  2020   Retail Banking    Corporate Banking    Treasury    Total  
	 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢	
Revenue  
Interest	&		similar		revenue	(3	parties	)			 253,301,527		 	266,161,852		 	-					519,463,379	
	Interest		&	similar		expense			 	(63,574,762)	 	(50,185,179)	 	(491,470)	 	(114,251,411)
Net interest margin    189,726,765   215,976,673   (491,470)  405,211,968
 
Fees	&		commission	revenue		 	47,445,767		 	29,303,732		 	398,607		 	77,148,106	
	Fees	&		commission	expense			 	(21,145,168)	 	(1,702,041)	 	-					(22,847,209)
 Net commission income    26,300,599   27,601,691   398,607   54,300,897 
	Net	trading	revenue	 	11,598,375		 	30,058,677		 	3,193		 	41,660,244	
	Net	income	from	other	financial	instruments	carried	at	fair	value		 	-				 	-					52,417,416		 	52,417,416	
	Other		operating	income			 	(4,059,216)	 	(593,346)	 	7,689		 	(4,644,872)
 Total other operating income    7,539,159   29,465,331   52,428,298   89,432,788 
Total operating income    223,566,523   273,043,695   52,335,435   548,945,653
 
Net	impairment	loss	on	financial	assets		 	(16,853,410)	 	(16,496,164)	 	-					(33,349,574)
	Personnel		expenses			 	(64,806,086)	 	(53,088,277)	 	(10,797,483)	 	(128,691,845)
 Depreciation/ amortisation    (16,566,524)  (14,283,803)  (2,737,837)  (33,588,164)
	Other		operating		expenses			 	(53,631,154)	 	(65,500,185)	 	(12,554,696)	 	(131,686,035
Total operating expense    (135,003,764)  (132,872,265)  (26,090,016)  (293,966,044)
Profit before tax    71,709,349   123,675,266   26,245,419   221,630,035 
Total  assets    2,063,062,479   3,036,181,771   15,962,102   5,115,206,352 
Total liabilites    2,006,059,483   2,183,551,980   -     4,189,611,463 
No	revenue	 from	transactions	 with	a	single	customer	 or	counter	party	amounted	 to	10%	or	more	of	the	Bank’s	total	revenue	
in	2020		or	2019	.All	Segment	 revenue	 are	from	external	 customers	 only.	The	Accounting	 policies	of	the	reportable	 segments	
are	the	same	as	the	Bank.	There	were	no	intra	company	profit	for	the	period	under	review.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
92
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC31	December	2019	 	Retail	Banking			 	Corporate	Banking			 	Treasury			 	Total		
	 GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢		 	GH¢	
Revenue     
Interest	&		similar		revenue	(3	parties	)		 	215,680,234		 	238,368,523		 	-					454,048,757	
Interest		&	similar		expense		 	(49,344,881)	 	(35,865,833)	 	(3,024,343)	 	(88,235,057)
Net interest margin   166,335,353   202,502,690   (3,024,343)  365,813,700
 
Fees	&		commission	revenue	 	43,260,939		 	29,927,525		 	8,411		 	73,196,875	
Fees	&		commission	expense		 	(21,591,067)	 	(1,562,957)	 	-					(23,154,024)
Net commission income   21,669,872   28,364,568   8,411   50,042,851 
Net	trading	revenue																																																																			 	9,191,732		 	25,285,454		 	39,588		 	34,516,774	
Net	income	from	other	financial	instruments	carried	at	fair	value	 	367,618		 	367,618		 	39,011,224		 	39,746,460	
Other		operating	income		 	15,212,042		 	3,683,979		 	40,451		 	18,936,472	
Total other operating income   24,771,392   29,337,051   39,091,263   93,199,706 
 Total operating income   212,776,617   260,204,309   36,075,331   509,056,257
 
Net impairment loss on financial assets  (18,598,044)  (36,324,622)  -     (54,922,666)
Personnel		expenses		 	(62,111,711)	 	(53,102,181)	 	(8,023,471)	 	(123,237,363)
Depreciation/	amortisation		 	(16,323,162)	 	(14,804,928)	 	(2,052,590)	 	(33,180,680)
Other		operating		expenses		 	(50,585,998)	 	(61,861,566)	 	(8,576,632)	 	(121,024,196)
Total operating expense   (129,020,871)  (129,768,675)  (18,652,693)  (277,442,239)
Profit before tax   65,157,702   94,111,012   17,422,638   176,691,352 
Total  assets   1,691,279,929   2,737,953,558   14,675,721   4,443,909,208 
Total liabilites   1,622,482,605   2,019,465,170   -     3,641,947,775Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
93
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC39.   Capital
Capital management
The	primary	 objectives	 of	the	Bank’s	 capital	
management	 are	to	ensure	that	the	bank	complies	
with	externally	 imposed	 capital	requirement	 by	Bank	
of	Ghana	and	that	the	bank	maintains	 strong	credit	
rating and healthy capital ratios in order to support its 
business	 and	to	maximise	 shareholders	 value.	The	Bank	
manages	 its	capital	structure	 and	makes	adjustment	 to	
it in the light of changes in the economic conditions and 
risk	characteristics	 of	its	activities.	 In	order	to	maintain	
or	adjust	the	capital	structure,	 the	Bank	may	adjust	the	
amount of dividend payments to shareholders, return 
capital	to	shareholders	 or	issue	capital	securities.	 No	
changes	 were	made	in	the	objectives,	 policies	 and	
processes	from	the	previous	years.
a. Capital definition
The Bank’s capital comprises stated capital, share deals 
account,	 retained	 earnings	 including	 current	year	profit	
and various reserves the company is statutorily required 
to	maintain.	 As	a	bank,	it	also	has	regulatory	 capital	as	
defined	below:
b. Stated capital
This amount is made up of issue of shares for cash and 
transfers	from	retained	earnings.
c. Income surplus
This	amount	 represents	 the	cumulative	 annual	profits	
after	appropriations	 	 available	 for	distribution	 to	
shareholders.d. Revaluation reserve
This amount comprises revaluation of property, plant 
and	equipment.
e. Statutory reserve
This	is	amount	 set	aside	from	annual	profit	as	a	non-
distributable	 reserve	 in	accordance	 with	regulatory	
requirements.
The transfer to Statutory Reserve Fund is in compliance 
with the Banks and Specialized Deposit Taking 
Institutions	Act,	2016	(Act	930).
f. Credit risk reserve
This is amount set aside from retained earnings as a 
non-distributable	 reserve	to	meet	minimum	 regulatory	
requirements in respect of allowance for credit losses for 
non-performing	loans	and	advances.
g. Regulatory capital
Regulatory capital consist of Tier 1 capital, which 
comprises share capital, share deals account, retained 
earnings	 including	 current	year	profit,	foreign	currency	
translation and minority interests less accrued dividend, 
net	long	positions	 in	own	share	and	goodwill.	 Certain	
adjustments	 are	made	to	IFRS-based	 result	and	reserves,	
as	prescribed	 by	the	Central	Bank	of	Ghana.	The	other	
component	 of	regulatory	 capital	is	Tier	2	capital	which	
includes	revaluation	reserves.
h. Other reserves
This	is	made	up	of		available	 for	sale	reserve	on	debt	
securities	 and	available	 for	sale	on	equity	investments.	
Available	 for	sale	reserve	 on	debt	securities	 records	
unrealized	gains	and	losses	on	government	securities.
Opening	balances		 -				 	-	
	Investment	securities	measured	at	FVOCI-	gross	 	1,781,205		 	-			
	Investment	securities	measured	at	FVOCI-	tax	 	(445,301)		 	-			
Total other reserves 1,335,904  -2020
Available for sale 
reserve2019
Available for sale 
reserveNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
94
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCi. Capital adequacy
The	adequacy	 of	the	Bank’s	capital	is	monitored	 using,	among	other	measures,	 the	rules	and	ratios	established	 by	the	Basel	
Committee	 on	Banking	 Supervision	 and	adopted	 by	the	Bank	of	Ghana.		 The	capital	adequacy	 ratio	of	the	Bank	as	of	31	
December	2020		is	shown	below:
 2020	 2019
 GH¢ 	 	GH¢	
Tier	1	capital			 567,738,470		 	480,824,924	
Tier	2	capital		 	75,391,283		 73,607,798	
Total regulatory capital  643,129,753  554,432,722 
Total risk weighted assets 3,769,564,149  3,680,389,919 
Common equity tier 1 / rwa  15.06% 13.06%
Capital adequacy ratio    17.06% 15.06%
40. Compliance  status of externally imposed capital requirement
During	the	past	year	Societe	Generale	Ghana	PLC	had	complied	in	full	with	all	its	externally	imposed	capital	requirements.
Analysis of shareholdings
Category	 	Number	of		 	Number	of		 Percentage
	 	shareholders		 	shares		 Holding	%
1-1,000		 	26,972		 	8,247,086		 1.16%
1,001-5,000		 	5,203		 	8,812,916		 1.24%
5,001-10,000			 894		 	5,826,167		 0.82%
Over	10,000		 	682		 	686,255,198		 96.77%
  33,751   709,141,367  100.0%
41. Subsequent events
Since	31	December	 2019,	the	spread	of	COVID-19	 has	severely	 affected	 many	local	economies	 around	the	globe	with	Ghana	
seeing	its	first	case	on	12	March	2020.		In	many	countries,	 most	businesses	 are	being	adversely	 affected	 or	forced	to	cease/
limit	operations	 for	long	or	indefinite	 periods.		 This	is	mainly	because	 measures	 taken	to	contain	the	spread	of	the	virus,	
including	 travel	bans,	quarantines,	 social	distancing,	 and	closures	 of	non-essential	 services	 have	triggered	 significant	
disruptions	to	businesses	worldwide,	resulting	in	an	economic	slowdown.	
The	Company	 has	determined	 that	these	events	are	non-adjusting	 subsequent	 events	as	the	COVID-19	 is	indicative	 of	a	
condition	 that	arose	after	the	end	of	the	reporting	 period.	Accordingly,	 the	financial	 position	 and	results	of	operations	 as	of	
and	for	the	year	ended	31	December	2020		have	not	been	adjusted	to	reﬂect	their	impact.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
95
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC42. Value added statement 
 2020	 2019
Value added statements for the year ended 31  December  2020  GH¢		 	GH¢	
Interest	earned	and	other	operating	income	 	686,044,273		 	619,821,376	
Direct	cost	 	(137,098,620)	 	(111,389,081)
Value	added	by	banking	services	 	548,945,653		 	508,432,295
Non	-	banking	income	 	-				 	623,961
Impairments	 	(33,349,574)	 	(54,922,666)
Value added   515,596,079   454,133,590
 
Distributes as follows:   
To employees :-   
Directors	(without	executives)	 	(803,027)	 	(1,309,833)
Executive	directors	 	(2,391,327)	 	(2,086,712)
Other	employees	 	(126,300,518)	 	(121,150,652)
To government :- 
Income	tax	 	(67,421,120)	 	(48,149,164)
To	providers	of	capital	:-	
Dividend to shareholders   
To expansion and growth :- 
Depreciation		 	(32,459,174)	 	(31,877,648)
Amortisation	 	(1,128,990)	 	(1,303,033)
Other	operating	cost	 	(130,883,008)	 	(121,024,195)
To retained earnings	 	154,208,915		 128,542,186Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
96
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC43. Twenty Largest Shareholders 
Shareholders Number of  
Account Name Holding  % Owned
1	 SG-FINANCIAL	SERVICES	HOLDING,	 	427,079,030		 	60.22	
2	 SOCIAL	SECURITY	AND	NATIONAL	INSURANCE	TRUST,	 	137,262,404		 	19.36	
3	 OFORI,	DANIEL	 	48,241,241		 	6.80	
4	 SCGN	/	ENTERPRISE	LIFE	ASS.	CO.	POLICY	HOLDERS	 	11,589,540		 	1.63	
5	 AMENUVOR,	GIDEON	 	3,693,934		 	0.52	
6	 SCGN/CITIBANK	KUWAIT	INV	AUTHORITY	 	3,428,568		 	0.48	
7	 SOCIETE	GENERAL	EMPLOYEES’	SHARE	OWNERSHIP	 	3,348,127		 	0.47	
8	 SCGN/DATABANK	BALANCED	FUND	LIMITED	 	2,538,447		 	0.36	
9	 ENO	INTERNATIONAL	LLC,	 	2,494,761		 	0.35	
10	 SCGN/JPMORGAN	BK	LUX	SA	RE	ROBECO	AFRIKA	FONDS	N.V,		056898600288	 2,193,248		 	0.31	
11	 SCGN/CACEIS	BANK	RE:HMG	GLOBETROTTER	 	2,125,646		 	0.30	
12	 SCGN/’EPACK	INVESTMENT	FUND	LIMITED	TRANSACTION	 	2,113,443		 	0.30	
13	 ADJEPON-YAMOAH,	BEATRICE	E.	MRS	 	1,982,930		 	0.28	
14	 EDC/TEACHERS	EQUITY	FUND,	 	1,746,206		 	0.25	
15	 HFCN/	EDC	GHANA	BALANCED	FUND	LIMITED	 	1,381,333		 	0.19	
16	 SCGN/SSB	EATON	VANCE	TAX-,	MANAGED	EMERGING	MARKET	FUND	 	1,345,362		 	0.19	
17	 SCGN/GHANA	MEDICAL	ASS.	PENSION	FUND	 	1,187,696		 	0.17	
18	 MR,	PHILIP	OPOKU-MENSAH	 	1,138,474		 	0.16	
19	 SCGN:ENTERPRICE	LIFE,	C/O	STANDARD	CHARTERED	E	L	A	L	 	1,025,922		 	0.14	
20	 MBG	ESSPA	SCHEME	 	1,009,233		 	0.14
 Total   656,925,545   92.64 
 Others   52,215,822   7.36 
 Grand Total   709,141,367  100.00%
44. Director’s shareholding
Director   Shareholding
NIL  -
45. ANALYSIS OF SHAREHOLDING AT  31 DECEMBER 2020
 NUMBER	OF	SHAREHOLDERS	 NUMBER	OF	SHARES	 	%	HOLDING
NON	DEPOSITORY	 24,217	 19,547,655	 2.76
DEPOSITORY	(CSD)	 9,534	 689,593,712	 97.24
TOTAL	 33,751	 709,141,367	 100.00Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
97
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNOTES:
i.	In	compliance	 with	the	current	 restrictions	 on	public	
gatherings in force pursuant to the imposition of 
Restrictions	 Act,	2020	(Act	1012)	and	consequent	
Regulatory	 Directives,	 attendance	 and	participation	 by	all	
members	 and/or	their	proxies	in	this	year’s	Annual	General	
Meeting	 of	the	Company	 shall	be	strictly	virtual	(i.e.	by	
online	participation).
ii.	A	member	 entitled	 to	attend	and	vote	at	the	Annual	
General Meeting may appoint a proxy to attend (via online 
participation)	 and	vote	on	his/her	behalf.	Such	a	proxy	
need	not	be	a	member	of	the	Company.
iii.	The	appointment	 of	a	proxy	will	not	prevent	 a	member	
from	subsequently	 attending	 and	voting	at	the	meeting	
(via	online	participation).	 Where	a	member	 attends	
the meeting in person (participates on line), the proxy 
appointment	shall	be	deemed	to	be	revoked.
iv.	A	copy	of	the	Form	of	Proxy	can	be	downloaded	 from	
the	Societe	 Generale	 Ghana	 PLC	website	 https://
societegenerale.com.gh	 and	may	be	filled	and	sent	via	
email	to	registrars@nthc.com.gh	 or	deposited	 at	the	
registered	 office	of	the	Registrars	 of	the	Company,	 NTHC	
Company Limited, Martco House, Dede Awula Street, 
Off	Kwame	 Nkrumah	 Avenue,	 Adabraka	 Accra	to	arrive	
no	later	than	48	hours	before	the	appointed	 time	for	the	
meeting.	Accessing	and	Voting	at	the	Virtual	AGMv.	A	unique	token	number	 will	be	sent	to	shareholders	 by	
email	and/or	SMS	from	14	March	2021	to	give	them	access	
to	the	meeting.		 Shareholders	 who	do	not	receive	this	
token can contact the Registrars NTHC Company Limited, 
Martco	House,	Dede	Awula	Street,	Off	Kwame	 Nkrumah	
Avenue,	 Adabraka	 Accra	or	on	telephone	 number	 059	310	
5735	or	by	email		registrars@nthc.com.gh		 or	any	time	
after	14	March	2021	but	before	the	date	of	the	AGM	to	be	
sent	the	unique	token.
vi.	 To gain access to the Virtual Annual General Meeting, 
shareholders	 must	visit	https://sgghanaagm.com	 and	
input	their	unique	token	number	 shared	with	them	to	
gain	access	to	the	meeting.	 For	shareholders	 who	do	
not	submit	proxy	forms	to	the	Registrar	 of	the	Company	
prior to the meeting they may vote electronically during 
the	Virtual	AGM;	again,	using	their	unique	token	number.	
Further assistance on accessing the meeting and voting 
electronically	 can	be	found	on	https://societegenerale.
com.gh	and	https://sgghanaagm.com
For	further	information,	please	contact	the	Registrar:
NTHC Company Limited
Martco House, Dede Awula Street
Off	Kwame	Nkrumah	Avenue
PO Box KIA 9563, Accra
Telephone	No:	059	310	5735
Email:	registrars@nthc.com.gh
 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
98
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCSOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC 
PROXY FORM FOR ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING  
I/We	…………………………………………………………………….......……………………………….……………...............…….	
(Block Capital Please) 
Of	………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….................…..	
being	member/members	of	SOCIETE	GENERALE	GHANA	PLC		
 
hereby	appoint…………………………….……….…………………………………………………………………….............….….	
insert full name) 
Of………………………………….………………………………………………………………………………….….........………….	
(or	failing	him	the	duly	appointed	Chairman	of	the	meeting)	as	my/our	Proxy	to	vote	for	me/us	at	the	Virtual	Annual	
General	meeting	to	be	held	on	Thursday	30	September	2021at	11.00	a.m.	and	at	every	adjournment	thereof):
Please indicate with an X	how	you	wish	your	vote	to	be	cast
RESOLUTION FOR AGAINST
1.	 To	receive	the	accounts
2.	 To	re-elect		as		non-executive	director	Laurette	Otchere
3.	 To	elect	as	Independent	Non-Executive	Director Francis	Awua-Kyerematen
4.	 To		approve	directors	fees
5.	 To	authorize	the	directors	to	fix	the	auditors	fees
Signed	this	……………	day	of	……………………...................................................……	2021
Shareholder’s	Signature………….................................................…………………………….	PROXY FORM
99
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC BOARD RESOLUTIONS
	 The	 Board	of	Directors	 will	be	proposing	 the	following	
resolutions	 which	would	be	put	to	the	Annual	General	
Meeting:
 
1. RECEIVE THE 2020 ACCOUNTS
	 The	 Board	shall	propose	 the	acceptance	 of	the	2020	
Financial Statements as the true and fair view of the state 
of	affairs	of	the	company	 for	the	year	ended	31	December	
2020.
    
2. RE-ELECT  DIRECTORS
	 To	 re-elect	 Directors,	 the	following	 Director	 retiring	 by	
rotation	 pursuant	 to	Section	 88	(1)	of	the	Constitution	 of	
the	Company’s	 Constitution	 retire	by	rotation	 and	being	
eligible;	offers	herself	for		re-election	as	a	director:-
• Mrs.		Laurette	Otchere
3. ELECTION OF DIRECTORS 
In	accordance	 with	Section	72(1)	and	90	of	the	Constitution	
of	the	Bank	Mr	Francis	Awua-Kyerematen	 was	appointed	
as a Independent Non Executive Director of the Bank and 
offers	himself	for	election.	4. APPROVE DIRECTORS FEES
	 In	accordance	 with	Section	 185(1)(2)	 of	the	Companies	
Act,	2019(	Act	992)	and	Section	 78(3)	of	the	Constitution	
of	the	Bank	it	is	hereby	proposed	 that	the	Directors	
remuneration	 be	paid	at	such	a	rate	not	exceeding	 an	
aggregate	 of	GH¢648,592.73		 It	is	further	proposed	 that	the	
Board	of	Directors	 be	given	the	mandate	 to	approve	 the	
emoluments	of	the	Executive	Director.
5. AUTHORISATION OF THE DIRECTORS TO DETERMINE 
THE REMUNERATION OF THE AUDITORS
 In accordance with Section 140 (1)(a) of the Companies Act 
,2019	(Act	992)	and	Section	 54(2)	(d)	of	the	Constitution	
of the Bank, the Board of Directors recommend that the 
current	Auditors	 Messrs	Ernst	&	Young	continue	 as	Auditors	
of	the	Company.	 The	Board	will	request	 that	they	fix	the	
fees	of	the	Auditors.	RESOLUTION TO BE PASSED
AT THE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
100
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCTHE REGISTRAR
NTHC LIMITED
MARTCO	HOUSE
P.O.BOX	KA	9563
AIRPORT
ACCRA
FOLD HERE
FOLD HERE
101
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCVISIT ANY
OF OUR 39
OUTLETS
ACROSS
GHANA
SpintexAshaiman
OsuTema Motorway
MadinaTema Fishing Habour
East Legon
AchimotaTema Comm. 1
Tema Comm. 2
Cape CoastKumasi
CENTRALEASTERNSuame
TuduKumasi Central
Kasoa
Airport
Faanofa
North Industrial AreaTakoradi
MainTarkwa
Takoradi
Market CircleWESTERN
 NORTH
WESTERNKejetiaAdum
AsafoHoASHANTISunyaniSAVANNAH
BONO EAST
AHAFO
VOLTAOTIBONONORTHERNNORTH EASTUPPER EAST
WaUPPER WEST
Accra
GREA TER
ACCRATema
DansomanOkaishie
Kaneshie
Accra Main
Accra New Town Premier TowersBurma CampPig FarmLotteriesNAME OF BRANCH ADDRESS PHO NE NO  
GREATER ACCRA       
Accra Main P. O. Box 13119, Accra 0302 208 600 /  030291 1021 GA-047-7257 
Accra New Town P O Box 13119, Accra 03022 28515 GA-044-7774 
Achimota P O Box 13119, Accra 03039 74818 GA-044-7774 
Airport City P O Box 13119, Accra 03070 11347 GL-126-6927 
Ashaiman P.O.Box Co 2885, Tema 03070 11518 / 0307 011654 GB-018-9776 
Burma Camp Spot bank P O Box 13119, Accra 030 7 0115 25 GL-088-0179 
Dansoman   P O Box 13119, Accra 0302 322 547-9  GA-471-9567 
East Legon  P O Box 13119, Accra 03022 543728/9  GA-288-4215 
Faanofa P O Box 13119, Accra 0302 2525 00  GA-099-3044 
Kanes hie P O Box 13119, Accra 0302 682 846  GA-263-8749 
Kanes hie Market P O Box 13119, Accra 0303 9784 22  GA-313-4497 
Lotteries Agency P O Box 13119, Accra 030 2 6673 70/2672610 GA-143-9373 
Madina P O Box 13119, Accra 05776 50907 / 0307 012922 GM-018-0749  
North Industrial Area P O Box 13119, Accra 0302 2298 11  GA-171-3067 
Okaishie P O Box 13119, Accra 05776 50384 / 5    GA-141-2594 
Osu  P O Box 13119, Accra 0302 7903 84  GA-035-5968 
Pig F arm Spot Bank P O Box 13119, Accra 030 2 9349 72 GA-061-0461 
Premier Towers P O Box 13119, Accra 030 2 6686 50/2667146/2682 207 GA-110-5597 
Spintex Road  P O Box 13119, Accra 0302 9619 93 GT-334-3510  
Tema Community 2 P O Box Co 2885, Tema 03032 02558Lorem ipsum
 GT-055-2185  
Tema Fishing Harbour P O Box Co 1668, Tema 030 3 2044 62/3202288 GT-062-1084  
Tema Motorway Spot Bank  P.O.Box Co 2885, Tema 030 2 9591 27 GB-009-6202 
Tudu P O Box 13119, Accra 0577 650 930  GA-142-6841 
   
ASHANTI REG ION       
Adum  P O Box 4542, Kumasi 0577 6509 22 / 0322 025379    
Kumasi Central P O Box 4542, Kumasi 0577 6509 72-4    
Suam e P O Box 4542, Kumasi 03039 73691 
  Kejetia P O Box 4542, Kumasi 020 2 8010 70 AK-006-1536 
   
BONO REG ION       
Berekum P O Box 49, Berekum 035 2 2222 61/2222262   
Suny ani P O Box 1131, Suny ani 03520 27050 BS-0006 -3640 
CEN TRAL REG ION       
Cape Coast P O Box 1019, Cape Coast 03321 32159 CC-023-6570 
Dunkwa P O Box 64, Dunkwa 03029 47741   
Kasoa P O Box 13119, Accra 03029 84479 / 0302 963765 CG-0702 -0351 
       
EASTERN RE GION       
Akim Oda P O Box 325, Akim Oda  05776 50949/50   
Koforidua P O Box 987, Koforidua 034 2 0222 36/2022778   
   
NORTHER N REG ION       
Tamale P O Box 192, Tamale 03720 23253 NT-0008 -6651  
       
UPPER  EAST REGION       
Bolgatanga  P O Box 344, Bolgatanga 03820 11064 UB-0001 -1721 
   
UPPER  WEST REG ION       
Wa P O Box 240, Wa 03920 22147 XW-0018-3163 
   
VOLTA REGION       
Ho P O Box HP - 360, Ho 03620 26651   
   
WEST ERN  NORTH 
REG ION       
Bibiani P O Box 58, Bibiani 031 2 0930 31/2093032 WB-0001-2569 
      
WEST ERN  REG ION       
Tarkwa P O Box 219, Tarkwa 031 2 3209 51/2320950 WT-0004-1130 
Takoradi P O Box 660, Takoradi 05776 50941   
Takoradi Market Circle P O Box 660, Takoradi 03120 33288   
DIGITAL ZON ES 
37 M ILLITARY HO SPIT AL  P. O. Box 13119, Accra 0302 2086 00 GA-007-6869 
METHODIST UNIVERS ITY P. O. Box 13119, Accra 0302 2086 00 GA-504-9707 
UNIVERSIT Y OF G HANA P. O. Box 13119, Accra 0302 2086 00 GA-419-6620 
A&C MALL P. O. Box 13119, Accra 0302 2086 00 GA-412-0993 
    
HEA D OFFICE BUSINES S UNITS    
NAME OF DEPARTM ENT ADDRESS PHO NE NO  GA-048-6249 
CORPO RATE BANKIN G P. O. Box 13119, Accra 0302 2086 00 GA-048-6249 
SME BANKING  P. O. Box 13119, Accra 0302 2086 00 GA-048-6249 
GLOBAL TRAN SACTION 
BANK ING P. O. Box 13119, Accra 0302 2086 00 GA-048-6249 DIGITAL ADDRESS
CALL
0302 214 314 to speak to our
24/7 contact service agents
Call 0302 208 60
Ext 2023 for enquires about
all corporate products
102
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes
103
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC

Extracted from: absa-annual-financial-statement-2021.pdf
  2021 2020
   
Interest income calculated using the effective interest method 1,440,284 1,340,468
Interest expense  (356,225) (375,330)
Net interest income  1,084,059 965,138
Fees and commission income  213,016 175,526
Fees and commission expense  (30,917) (25,030)
Net fees and commission income  182,099 150,496
Net trading income  338,582 283,543
Net trading income  338,582 283,543
Revenue  1,604,740 1,399,177
Other income  36,471 178
Operating income  1,641,211 1,399,355
Impairment loss on ﬁnancial assets  (88,893) (137,613)
Personnel expenses  (341,983) (299,502)
Depreciation and amortisation  (34,905) (31,670)
Other expenses  (114,958) (247,407)
Proﬁt before tax  1,060,472 683,163
Income tax expense  (367,953) (212,035)
Proﬁt after tax attributable to equity holders of the Bank 692,519 471,128
Other comprehensive income   
Items that will not be reclassiﬁed to proﬁt or loss:   
Actuarial gain on deﬁned beneﬁt liability  6,872 1,823
Items that are or may be reclassiﬁed to proﬁt or loss:   
Impairment loss on investment securities at FVOCI  (5,960) 7,856
Release to proﬁt or loss on derecognised FVOCI assets (net of tax) (13,506) (2,444)
Net gain/ (loss) on fair value on ﬁnancial assets at FVOCI (net of tax) (32,078) 37,154
Other comprehensive income, net of tax  (44,672) 44,389
Total comprehensive income  647,847 515,517
Proﬁt attributable to:   
Owners of the bank  692,519 471,128
Total comprehensive income attributable to:   
Owners of the bank  647,847 515,517
Earnings per share    
Basic & Diluted earnings per share (Ghana Cedis per share) 7.70 5.24Summary Financial Statements Prepared from the Audited Financial Statements 
for the year ended 31 December 2021
Summary Statement of Comprehensive Income 
for the year ended 31 December 2021 
(all amounts are expressed in thousands of Ghana Cedis)
  2021 2020
Assets     
Cash and cash equivalents  2,858,669 1,510,299
Non pledged trading assets  3,232,950 2,192,367
Derivative assets  99,287 39,283
Loans and advances to banks  519,044 244,620
Loans and advances to customers  4,785,114 4,481,173
Investment securities  3,541,278 3,318,260
Other assets  733,348 539,790
Current tax asset  33,040 - 
Property and equipment  143,938 161,460
Intangible assets  9,345 1,481
Deferred tax assets  81,535 57,740
Total assets  16,037,548 12,546,473
Liabilities   
Derivative liabilities  96,028 50,312
Deposits from banks  335,899 384,356
Deposits from customers  7,944,122 6,506,449
Borrowings  4,306,825 2,695,019
Current tax liabilities   - 3,185
Retirement beneﬁt obligation  99,484 88,478
Other liabilities  957,526 870,268
Total liabilities  13,739,885 10,598,067
Capital and reserves   
Stated capital  400,000 400,000
Retained earnings  1,295,154 968,311
Statutory reserve  631,240 544,675
Credit risk reserve  19,246 40,135
Other reserves  (47,977) (4,715)
Total equity  2,297,663 1,948,406
Total equity and liabilities  16,037,548 12,546,473Summary Statement of Financial Position 
as at 31 December 2021  
(all amounts are expressed in thousands of Ghana Cedis)
2021
Balance as at 1 January 400,000 968,311 544,675 40,135 (4,715) 1,948,406
Total comprehensive income      
Proﬁt for the year   - 692,519  -  - -  692,519
Other comprehensive income      
Deﬁned beneﬁt plan actuarial movement  -  -  -  - 6,872 6,872
ECL on investments at FVOCI  -  -  -  - (5,960) (5,960)
Release to proﬁt or loss  FVOCI assets  -  -  -  - (13,506) (13,506)
Fair value loss on ﬁnancial assets at FVOCI  -  -  -  - (32,078) (32,078)
Total other comprehensive income  -  -  -  - (44,672) (44,672)
Total comprehensive income  - 692,519  -  - (44,672) 647,847
Transactions with equity holders of the Bank      
Contributions and distributions      
Share based payment transactions  -  -  -  - 1,410 1,410
Dividends to equity holders  - (300,000)  -  -  - (300,000)
Total contributions and distributions  - (300,000)  -  - 1,410 (298,590)
Other transfers      
Transfer from credit risk reserve  - 20,889  - (20,889)  -  -
Transfer to statutory reserve  - (86,565) 86,565  -  -  -
Total other transfers  - (65,676) 86,565 (20,889)  -  -
Balance at 31 December 400,000 1,295,154 631,240 19,246 (47,977) 2,297,663  Stated capital Retained Statutory  Credit risk  Other Total
   earnings reserve  reserves  reservesSummary Statement of Changes in Equity  
for the year ended 31 December 2021
 (all amounts are expressed in thousands of Ghana Cedis)
GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000
GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’0002020
Balance at 1 January 400,000 683,756 485,784 112,453 (48,871) 1,633,122
Total comprehensive income      
Proﬁt for the year   - 471,128  -  -  - 471,128
Other comprehensive income      
Deﬁned beneﬁt plan actuarial movement  -  -  - -  1,823 1,823
ECL on investments at FVOCI  -  -  - -  7,856 7,856
Release to proﬁt or loss  FVOCI assets  -  -  - -  (2,444) (2,444)
Fair value loss on ﬁnancial assets at FVOCI  -  -  - -  37,154 37,154
Total other comprehensive income  -  -  - -  44,389 44,389
Total comprehensive income   - 471,128  - -  44,389 515,517
Transactions with equity holders of the Bank      
Contributions and distributions      
Share based payment transactions   -  -  - -  (233) (233)
Dividends to equity holders  - (200,000)  - -   - (200,000)
Total contributions and distributions  - (200,000)  - -  (233) (200,233)
Other transfers      
Transfer to credit risk reserve  - 72,318  - (72,318)  -  -
Transfer to statutory reserve  - (58,891) 58,891 -   -  -
Total other transfers  - 13,427 58,891 (72,318)  -  -
Balance at 31 December 400,000 968,311 544,675 40,135 (4,715) 1,948,406  Stated capital Retained Statutory  Credit risk  Other Total
   earnings reserve  reserves  reserves
Summary Statement of Cash Flows 
for the year ended 31 December 2021 
(all amounts are expressed in thousands of Ghana Cedis)
  2021  2020
Cash ﬂows from operating activities
Proﬁt after tax  692,519 471,128
Adjustments for:   
Depreciation and amortisation   34,905 31,670
Net impairment loss on ﬁnancial assets   88,893 137,613
Income tax expense  367,953 212,035
Net interest income  (1,084,059) (965,138)
Unrealised (gain)/loss on derivatives  (14,288) 32,314
Equity settled share based payments  1,410 (233)
Loss on disposal of property and equipment  (36,669) 1,154
  50,664 (79,457)
Changes in:   
Non pledged trading assets  (1,040,583) 673,998
Loans and advances to banks  (278,324) (35,235)
Loans and advances to customers  (392,747) (654,732)
Other assets  1,684 (2,235)
Deposits from banks  (50,146) 11,551
Deposits from customers  1,429,738 1,359,093
Other liabilities   (80,900) 142,113
  (360,614) 1,415,096
Interest received  1,416,903 1,358,748
Interest paid  (340,371) (432,006)
Taxes paid  (412,778) (228,561)
Net cash from operating activities  303,140 2,113,277
Cash ﬂows from investing activities   
Acquisition of investment securities  (1,945,639) (1,784,183)
Proceeds from sale of investment securities  1,661,934 1,062,604
Acquisition of property and equipment  (16,984) (64,706)
Proceeds from disposal of property and equipment 36,942 123
Acquisition of intangible assets  (4,895) (1,027)
Net cash used in investing activities  (268,642) (787,189)
Financing activities   
Repayment of lease liability  (14,774) (7,627)
Proceeds from borrowed funds  4,023,962 2,225,617
Repayment of borrowed funds  (2,421,916) (3,441,867)
Dividends paid  (300,000) (200,000)
Net cash from/ (used in) ﬁnancing activities  1,287,272 (1,423,877)
Net increase/ (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 1,321,770 (97,789)
Balance at beginning  1,510,299 1,532,655
Effect of exchange rate ﬂuctuations on cash and cash 
equivalents held  26,600 75,433
Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December  2,858,669 1,510,299
Reporting entity
Absa Bank Ghana Limited (the "Bank") is a private company incorporated 
and domiciled in Ghana. The address of the Bank's registered ofﬁce is 
Absa Head Ofﬁce, High Street, P. O. Box 2949, Accra. The Bank primarily is 
involved in universal banking, spanning wholesale and retail banking, 
investment and asset management. The audited ﬁnancial statements 
were authorised for issue on 23 March 2022. 
Absa Bank Ghana Limited is a wholly owned subsidiary of Absa Group 
Limited (AGL), a limited liability company incorporated in the Republic of 
South Africa.
Basis of preparation
The summary ﬁnancial statements have been prepared in accordance 
with the requirements of the Guide for Financial Publication for Banks and 
Bank of Ghana Licensed Financial Institutions.
The Guide requires the summary ﬁnancial statements to be prepared in 
accordance with the framework concepts and the measurement and 
recognition requirements of International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRSs) as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) 
and adopted by Institute of Chartered Accountants, Ghana (ICAG).
The accounting policies applied in the preparation of the audited ﬁnancial 
statements, from which the summary ﬁnancial statements were derived, 
are in accordance with IFRSs and are consistent with the accounting 
policies applied in the preparation of the previous annual audited ﬁnancial 
statements.
The annual audited ﬁnancial statements are available for inspection at the 
Head Ofﬁce of Absa Bank Ghana Limited. 
Use of judgements and estimates
In the preparation of the annual audited ﬁnancial statements, 
management is required to make judgements, estimates and 
assumptions that affect reported income, expenses, assets, liabilities and 
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.  
Use of available information and the application of judgement is inherent 
in the formation of estimates.  Actual results in the future could differ 
from these estimates, which may be material to the annual audited 
ﬁnancial statements within the next ﬁnancial period. The impact of such 
revisions is recognised in the period in which the estimates are revised 
and any future period impacted.Interest income and expenses
Interest income and expense are recognised in proﬁt or loss using the 
effective interest method. The ‘effective interest rate’ is the rate that exactly 
discounts estimated future cash payments or receipts through the expected 
life of the ﬁnancial instrument to:
• the gross carrying amount of the ﬁnancial asset; or
• the amortised cost of the ﬁnancial liability.
Fee and commission income
Net fee and commission income that are integral to the effective interest rate 
on a ﬁnancial asset or ﬁnancial liability are included in the determination of 
effective interest rate. 
Fee and commission income from contracts with customers is measured 
based on the consideration speciﬁed in a contract with a customer. The Bank 
recognises revenue when it transfers control over a service to a customer. 
Revenue from account service and servicing fees is recognised over time as 
the services are provided. Revenue related to transactions is recognised at 
the point in time when the transaction takes place. 
Other fee and commission expenses relate mainly to transaction and service 
fees, which are expensed as the services are received.
 
Net trading income
Net trading income comprises gains less losses related to trading assets and 
liabilities and includes all fair value changes, interests and foreign exchange 
differences.
Contingent liabilities
Contingent liabilities amounted to GHS 1,637,791,316 (2020: GHS 
1,227,001,795).
Undrawn loan commitments
Undrawn formal stand-by loans and other facilities, credit lines and other 
commitments to lend amount to GHS  1,430,511,547 (2020: GHS 
1,045,067,337).
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT ON THE SUMMARY FINANCIAL 
STATEMENTS 
To the Members of Absa Bank Ghana Limited
Opinion
The summary ﬁnancial statements, which comprise the summary statement 
of ﬁnancial position as at 31 December 2021, and the summary statements of 
comprehensive income, changes in equity and cash ﬂows for the year then 
ended and related notes, are derived from the audited ﬁnancial statements of 
Absa Bank Ghana Limited for the year ended 31 December 2021.
In our opinion, t he accompanying summary ﬁnancial statements are a f air 
summary of the audited ﬁnancial statements, in accordance with the basis 
described in the notes.
Summary Financial Statements
The summary ﬁnancial statements do not contain all the disclosures required 
by International Financial Reporting Standards and in the manner required by 
the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised 
Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) applied in the preparation of 
the audited ﬁnancial statements of Absa Bank Ghana Limited. Reading the 
summary ﬁnancial statements and our report thereon, therefore, is not a 
substitute for reading the audited ﬁnancial statements and our report 
thereon.
The Audited Financial Statements and Our Report Thereon
We expressed an unmodiﬁed audit opinion on the audited ﬁnancial 
statements in our report dated 23 March 2022. That report also includes the 
communication of key audit matters. Key audit matters are those matters GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000
GHS’000 GHS’000(all amounts are expressed in thousands of Ghana Cedis)Summary Statement of Changes in Equity  
for the year ended 31 December 2021
Notes to the summary ﬁnancial statementsthat in our professional judgement, were of most signiﬁcance in our audit of 
the ﬁnancial statements for the current period.
Directors’ Responsibility for the Summary Financial Statements
The Directors are responsible for the preparation of the summary ﬁnancial 
statements in accordance with the basis described in the notes.
Auditor’s Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on whether the summary 
ﬁnancial statements are a fair summary of the audited ﬁnancial statements 
based on our procedures, which were conducted in accordance with 
International Standard on Auditing (ISA) 810 (Revised), Engagements to 
Report on Summary Financial Statements.
The engagement partner on the audit resulting in this independent 
auditor’s report is Labaran Amidu (ICAG/P/1472).
.................................................................
FOR AND ON BEHALF OF:
KPMG: (ICAG/F/2022/038)
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
13 YIYIWA DRIVE, ABELENKPE
P O BOX GP 242
ACCRA
23 March 2022
Disclosures – Quantitative 
 2021 2020
Capital adequacy ratio 23.09% 22.68%
Non-performing loan (NPL) ratio 7.20% 7.70%
Liquid ratio 75.59%     76.63%
Disclosures – Qualitative
Dominant Risks
The Bank has exposure to the following risks from its use of ﬁnancial 
instruments and from operations:
• Credit risk
• Liquidity risk
• Market risk
• Operational risk
The Board of Directors has overall responsibility for the establishment and 
oversight of the Bank’s risk management framework. The board has 
established the Bank’s Asset and Liability (ALCO) and the Credit and 
Operational Risk committees, which are responsible for developing and 
monitoring the Bank’s risk management policies in their speciﬁed areas. 
Other disclosures
1. For the period under review, the bank did not record any statutory 
 liquidity breaches and therefore did not incur any sanctions.
   2021 2020 
 (a)  Default in statutory liquidity Nil Nil 
 (b)  Sanctions (GHS'000) Nil Nil 
2. Other regulatory breaches (including onsite examination).
   2021 2020 
 (a)  Number of breaches  1 1 
 (b)  Sanctions (GHS'000) 12 69 
3. The summary ﬁnancial statements do not contain any untrue
  statements, misleading facts or omit material facts, to the best of our 
 knowledge.
Signed:Absa Bank Ghana Limited. Registration no. CS144072016. Regulated by Bank of Ghana. Toll free: 0800 222 333Reporting entity
Absa Bank Ghana Limited (the "Bank") is a private company incorporated 
and domiciled in Ghana. The address of the Bank's registered ofﬁce is 
Absa Head Ofﬁce, High Street, P. O. Box 2949, Accra. The Bank primarily is 
involved in universal banking, spanning wholesale and retail banking, 
investment and asset management. The audited ﬁnancial statements 
were authorised for issue on 23 March 2022. 
Absa Bank Ghana Limited is a wholly owned subsidiary of Absa Group 
Limited (AGL), a limited liability company incorporated in the Republic of 
South Africa.
Basis of preparation
The summary ﬁnancial statements have been prepared in accordance 
with the requirements of the Guide for Financial Publication for Banks and 
Bank of Ghana Licensed Financial Institutions.
The Guide requires the summary ﬁnancial statements to be prepared in 
accordance with the framework concepts and the measurement and 
recognition requirements of International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRSs) as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) 
and adopted by Institute of Chartered Accountants, Ghana (ICAG).
The accounting policies applied in the preparation of the audited ﬁnancial 
statements, from which the summary ﬁnancial statements were derived, 
are in accordance with IFRSs and are consistent with the accounting 
policies applied in the preparation of the previous annual audited ﬁnancial 
statements.
The annual audited ﬁnancial statements are available for inspection at the 
Head Ofﬁce of Absa Bank Ghana Limited. 
Use of judgements and estimates
In the preparation of the annual audited ﬁnancial statements, 
management is required to make judgements, estimates and 
assumptions that affect reported income, expenses, assets, liabilities and 
disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.  
Use of available information and the application of judgement is inherent 
in the formation of estimates.  Actual results in the future could differ 
from these estimates, which may be material to the annual audited 
ﬁnancial statements within the next ﬁnancial period. The impact of such 
revisions is recognised in the period in which the estimates are revised 
and any future period impacted.
  Frances Adu-Mante Abena Osei-Poku       
       Chairperson Managing DirectorInterest income and expenses
Interest income and expense are recognised in proﬁt or loss using the 
effective interest method. The ‘effective interest rate’ is the rate that exactly 
discounts estimated future cash payments or receipts through the expected 
life of the ﬁnancial instrument to:
• the gross carrying amount of the ﬁnancial asset; or
• the amortised cost of the ﬁnancial liability.
Fee and commission income
Net fee and commission income that are integral to the effective interest rate 
on a ﬁnancial asset or ﬁnancial liability are included in the determination of 
effective interest rate. 
Fee and commission income from contracts with customers is measured 
based on the consideration speciﬁed in a contract with a customer. The Bank 
recognises revenue when it transfers control over a service to a customer. 
Revenue from account service and servicing fees is recognised over time as 
the services are provided. Revenue related to transactions is recognised at 
the point in time when the transaction takes place. 
Other fee and commission expenses relate mainly to transaction and service 
fees, which are expensed as the services are received.
 
Net trading income
Net trading income comprises gains less losses related to trading assets and 
liabilities and includes all fair value changes, interests and foreign exchange 
differences.
Contingent liabilities
Contingent liabilities amounted to GHS 1,637,791,316 (2020: GHS 
1,227,001,795).
Undrawn loan commitments
Undrawn formal stand-by loans and other facilities, credit lines and other 
commitments to lend amount to GHS  1,430,511,547 (2020: GHS 
1,045,067,337).
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT ON THE SUMMARY FINANCIAL 
STATEMENTS 
To the Members of Absa Bank Ghana Limited
Opinion
The summary ﬁnancial statements, which comprise the summary statement 
of ﬁnancial position as at 31 December 2021, and the summary statements of 
comprehensive income, changes in equity and cash ﬂows for the year then 
ended and related notes, are derived from the audited ﬁnancial statements of 
Absa Bank Ghana Limited for the year ended 31 December 2021.
In our opinion, t he accompanying summary ﬁnancial statements are a f air 
summary of the audited ﬁnancial statements, in accordance with the basis 
described in the notes.
Summary Financial Statements
The summary ﬁnancial statements do not contain all the disclosures required 
by International Financial Reporting Standards and in the manner required by 
the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised 
Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) applied in the preparation of 
the audited ﬁnancial statements of Absa Bank Ghana Limited. Reading the 
summary ﬁnancial statements and our report thereon, therefore, is not a 
substitute for reading the audited ﬁnancial statements and our report 
thereon.
The Audited Financial Statements and Our Report Thereon
We expressed an unmodiﬁed audit opinion on the audited ﬁnancial 
statements in our report dated 23 March 2022. That report also includes the 
communication of key audit matters. Key audit matters are those matters Notes to the summary ﬁnancial statements (cont’d)
that in our professional judgement, were of most signiﬁcance in our audit of 
the ﬁnancial statements for the current period.
Directors’ Responsibility for the Summary Financial Statements
The Directors are responsible for the preparation of the summary ﬁnancial 
statements in accordance with the basis described in the notes.
Auditor’s Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on whether the summary 
ﬁnancial statements are a fair summary of the audited ﬁnancial statements 
based on our procedures, which were conducted in accordance with 
International Standard on Auditing (ISA) 810 (Revised), Engagements to 
Report on Summary Financial Statements.
The engagement partner on the audit resulting in this independent 
auditor’s report is Labaran Amidu (ICAG/P/1472).
.................................................................
FOR AND ON BEHALF OF:
KPMG: (ICAG/F/2022/038)
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
13 YIYIWA DRIVE, ABELENKPE
P O BOX GP 242
ACCRA
23 March 2022
Disclosures – Quantitative 
 2021 2020
Capital adequacy ratio 23.09% 22.68%
Non-performing loan (NPL) ratio 7.20% 7.70%
Liquid ratio 75.59%     76.63%
Disclosures – Qualitative
Dominant Risks
The Bank has exposure to the following risks from its use of ﬁnancial 
instruments and from operations:
• Credit risk
• Liquidity risk
• Market risk
• Operational risk
The Board of Directors has overall responsibility for the establishment and 
oversight of the Bank’s risk management framework. The board has 
established the Bank’s Asset and Liability (ALCO) and the Credit and 
Operational Risk committees, which are responsible for developing and 
monitoring the Bank’s risk management policies in their speciﬁed areas. 
Other disclosures
1. For the period under review, the bank did not record any statutory 
 liquidity breaches and therefore did not incur any sanctions.
   2021 2020 
 (a)  Default in statutory liquidity Nil Nil 
 (b)  Sanctions (GHS'000) Nil Nil 
2. Other regulatory breaches (including onsite examination).
   2021 2020 
 (a)  Number of breaches  1 1 
 (b)  Sanctions (GHS'000) 12 69 
3. The summary ﬁnancial statements do not contain any untrue
  statements, misleading facts or omit material facts, to the best of our 
 knowledge.
Signed:


Extracted from: absa-annual-financial-statement-2022.pdf
Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 31 DecemberStatement of Comprehensive Income for the year ended 31 December Statement of Financial Position as at 31 December
 2022                           2021
GHS'000                  GHS'000
Interest income calculated using the effective interest method                1,960,065                 1,440,284
Interest expense  (593,927) (356,225)
Net interest income     1,366,138 1,084,059
Fees and commission income  248,302 213,016
Fees and commission expense  (33,064) (30,917)
Net fees and commission income  215,238 182,099
Net trading income  487,792 338,582
Net trading income  487,792 338,582
Revenue  2,069,168 1,604,740
Other income  224 36,471
Operating income  2,069,392 1,641,211
Impairment loss on ﬁnancial assets  (2,126,914) (88,893)
Personnel expenses  (427,812) (341,983)
Depreciation and amortisation  (35,149) (34,905)
Other expenses  (41,979) (114,958)
(Loss)/Proﬁt before tax  (562,462) 1,060,472
Income tax expense  133,293 (367,953)
(Loss)/Proﬁt after tax attributable to equity holders of the Bank   (429,169)       692,519
Other comprehensive income   
Items that will not be reclassiﬁed to proﬁt or loss:   
Actuarial (loss)/gain on deﬁned beneﬁt liability  (16,407) 6,872
Items that are or may be reclassiﬁed to proﬁt or loss:   
Impairment loss/(reversal) on investment securities at FVOCI (net of tax) 956,381 (5,960)
Release to proﬁt or loss on derecognised FVOCI assets (net of tax) (6,218) (13,506)
Net loss on fair value on ﬁnancial assets at FVOCI (net of tax)    (668,644) (32,078)
Other comprehensive income, net of tax  265,112 (44,672)
Total comprehensive income  (164,057) 647,847
(Loss)/Proﬁt attributable to:   
Owners of the Bank  (429,169) 692,519
Total comprehensive income attributable to:   
Owners of the Bank  (164,057) 647,847
Earnings per share    
Basic & Diluted (loss)/earnings per share (Ghana Cedis per share)                    (4.77)              7.70 
 2022                2021
GHS'000        GHS'000
Assets   
Cash and cash equivalents  3,849,838 2,858,669
Non pledged trading assets  1,466,476 3,232,950
Derivative assets  416,227 99,287
Loans and advances to banks  768,075 519,044
Loans and advances to customers  5,135,435 4,785,114
Investment securities  3,958,094 3,541,278
Other assets  691,308 733,348
Current tax asset  66,910 33,040
Property and equipment  216,905 143,938
Intangible assets  13,918 9,345
Deferred tax assets  519,088 81,535
Total assets  17,102,274   16,037,548
Liabilities   
Derivative liabilities  104,427 96,028
Deposits from banks  124,609 335,899
Deposits from customers  11,177,398 7,944,122
Borrowings  2,408,221 4,306,825
Retirement beneﬁt obligation  134,804 99,484
Other liabilities  1,014,484 957,527
Total liabilities  14,963,943   13,739,885
Capital and reserves   
Stated capital  400,000 400,000
Retained earnings  885,231 1,295,154
Statutory reserve  631,240 631,240
Credit risk reserve  - 19,246
Other reserves  221,860 (47,977)
Total equity  2,138,331 2,297,663
Total equity and liabilities  17,102,274   16,037,548
Summary Financial Statements Prepared from the Audited Financial 
Statements for the year ended 31 December 2022
(429,169)
-
-
-
-
-
(429,169)
-
-
-
-
19,246
-
19,246
885,231-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
631,240-
-
-
 -
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(19,246)
-
(19,246)
--
(16,407)
956,381
 (6,218)
(668,644)
265,112
265,112
-
4,725
-
4,725
-
-
-
            221,860 (429,169)
(16,407)
956,381
 (6,218)
(668,644)
265,112
(164,057)
-
4,725
-
4,725
-
-
-            
2,138,331Stated Capital 2022 Retained Earnings Statutory Reserve Credit Risk Reserve Other Reserves
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
400,000Total
  
Other comprehensive income
Deﬁned beneﬁt plan actuarial movement  
ECL on investments at FVOCI  
Release to proﬁt or loss  FVOCI assets   
Fair value loss on ﬁnancial assets at FVOCI   
Total other comprehensive income   
Total comprehensive income   
Transactions with equity holders of the Bank
Contributions and distributions
Share based payment transactions
Dividends to equity holders 
Total contributions and distributions
Other transfers
Transfer from credit risk reserve
Transfer to statutory reserve
Total other transfers
Balance at 31 DecemberBalance as at 1 January
Total comprehensive income
Loss for the yearGHS'000
2,297,663GHS'000
(47,977)GHS'000
19,246GHS'000
631,240GHS'000
1,295,154GHS'000
400,000Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 31 December (Continued)
Statement of Cash Flows for the year ended 31 December
1. Reporting entity
Absa Bank Ghana Limited (the "Bank") is a private company incorporated and 
domiciled in Ghana. The address of the Bank's registered ofﬁce is Absa Head 
Ofﬁce, High Street, P. O. Box 2949, Accra. The Bank primarily is involved in 
universal banking, spanning wholesale and retail banking, investment and asset 
management. These are the summary ﬁnancial statements of the Bank. These 
summary ﬁnancial statements were authorised for issue on 5 April 2023. 
Absa Bank Ghana Limited is a wholly owned subsidiary of Absa Group Limited 
(AGL), a limited liability company incorporated in the Republic of South Africa.
2. Basis of preparation
The summary ﬁnancial statements have been prepared in accordance with the 
requirements of the Guide for Financial Publication for Banks and Bank of Ghana 
Licensed Financial Institutions.
The Guide requires the summary ﬁnancial statements to be prepared in 
accordance with the framework concepts and the measurement and recognition 
requirements of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRSs) as issued by 
the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and adopted by Institute of 
Chartered Accountants, Ghana (ICAG).
The accounting policies applied in the preparation of the audited ﬁnancial 
statements, from which the summary ﬁnancial statements were derived, are in 
accordance with IFRSs and are consistent with the accounting policies applied in 
the preparation of the previous annual audited ﬁnancial statements.
The annual audited ﬁnancial statements are available for inspection at the Head 
Ofﬁce of Absa Bank Ghana Limited.
3. Use of judgements and estimates
In the preparation of the annual audited ﬁnancial statements, management is 
required to make judgements, estimates and assumptions that affect reported 
income, expenses, assets, liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and 
liabilities.
Use of available information and the application of judgement is inherent in the 
formation of estimates. Actual results in the future could differ from these 
estimates, which may be material to the annual audited ﬁnancial statements 
within the next ﬁnancial period. The impact of such
revisions is recognised in the period in which the estimates are revised and any 
future period impacted.
4. Interest income and expenses
Interest income and expense are recognised in proﬁt or loss using the effective 
interest method. The ‘effective interest rate’ is the rate that exactly discounts 
estimated future cash payments or receipts through the expected life of the 
ﬁnancial instrument to:
 • the gross carrying amount of the ﬁnancial asset; or
• the amortised cost of the ﬁnancial liability.Cash ﬂows from operating activities   
(Loss)/Proﬁt after tax    (429,169) 692,519
Adjustments for:   
Depreciation and amortisation   35,149 34,905
Net impairment loss on ﬁnancial assets   2,126,914 88,893
Income tax expense  (133,293) 367,953
Net interest income  (1,366,138) (1,084,059)
Unrealised gain on derivatives  (308,541) (14,288)
Net (loss)/gain on trading assets  154,103 (60,778)
Equity settled share-based payments  4,725 1,410
Gain on disposal of property and equipment  (57) (36,669)
  83,693 (10,114)
Changes in:   
Non pledged trading assets  1,612,370 (979,805)
Loans and advances to banks  (244,795) (278,324)
Loans and advances to customers  (1,107,409) (392,747)
Other assets  19,266 1,684
Deposits from banks  (211,290) (50,146)
Deposits from customers  3,233,277 1,429,738
Other liabilities   (86,134) (80,900)
  3,298,978 (360,614)
Interest received  1,959,973 1,416,903
Interest paid  (854,337) (340,371)
Taxes paid  (436,398) (412,778)
Net cash from operating activities  3,968,216 303,140
Cash ﬂows from investing activities   
Acquisition of investment securities  (4,078,063) (1,945,639)
Proceeds from sale of investment securities  2,574,243 1,661,934
Acquisition of property and equipment  (98,337) (16,984)
Proceeds from disposal of property and equipment  57 36,942
Acquisition of intangible assets  (6,339) (4,895)
Net cash used in investing activities  (1,608,439) (268,642)
Cash ﬂows from ﬁnancing activities   
Repayment of lease liability  (524) (14,774)
Proceeds from borrowed funds  1,607,502 4,023,962
Repayment of borrowed funds  (3,249,183) (2,421,916)
Dividends paid  -  (300,000)
Net cash (used in) /from ﬁnancing activities  (1,642,205) 1,287,272
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents  717,572 1,321,770
Balance at beginning  2,858,669 1,510,299
Effect of exchange rate ﬂuctuations on cash and cash equivalents held  273,597 26,600
Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December  3,849,838 2,858,669
  
Other comprehensive income
Deﬁned beneﬁt plan actuarial movement  
ECL on investments at FVOCI 
Release to proﬁt or loss  FVOCI assets   
Fair value loss on ﬁnancial assets at FVOCI   
Total other comprehensive income   
Total comprehensive income   
Transactions with equity holders of the Bank
Contributions and distributions
Share based payment transactions
Dividends to equity holders
Total contributions and distributions
Other transfers
Transfer from credit risk reserve
Transfer to statutory reserve
Total other transfers
Balance at 31 DecemberBalance as at 1 January
Total comprehensive income
Proﬁt for the year 692,519
-
-
-
-
-
692,519
-
-
(300,000)
(300,000)
20,889
(86,565)
(65,676)
1,295,154-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
86,565
86,565
631,240-
-
-
 -
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
(20,889)
-
(20,889)
19,246-
6,872
(5,960)
(13,506)
(32,078)
(44,672)
(44,672)
-
1,410
-
1,410
-
-
-
            (47,977)692,519
6,872
(5,960)
 (13,506)
(32,078)
(44,672)
647,847
-
1,410
(300,000)
(298,590)
-
-
-            
2,297,663Stated Capital Retained Earnings Statutory Reserve Credit Risk Reserve Other Reserves
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
400,000Total
GHS'000
1,948,406GHS'000
(4,715)GHS'000
40,135GHS'000
544,675GHS'000
968,311GHS'000
400,0002021
2022 2021Notes to the Summary Financial Statements5. Fee and commission income
Net fee and commission income that are integral to the effective interest rate on 
a ﬁnancial asset or ﬁnancial liability are included in the determination of effective 
interest rate.
Fee and commission income from contracts with customers is measured based on 
the consideration speciﬁed in a contract with a customer. The bank recognises 
revenue when it transfers control over a service to a customer. Revenue from 
account service and servicing fees is recognised over time as the services are 
provided. Revenue related to transactions is recognised at the point in time when 
the transaction takes place.
Other fee and commission expenses relate mainly to transaction and service
Fees, which are expensed as the services are received.
6. Net trading income
Net trading income comprises gains less losses related to trading assets and 
liabilities and includes all fair value changes, interests, dividends and foreign 
exchange differences.
7. Contingent liabilities
Contingent liabilities amounted to GHS 1,610,795,442  (2021: GHS 
1,637,791,316)
8. Undrawn loan commitments
Undrawn formal stand-by loan and other facilities, credit lines and other 
commitments to lend GHS   1,107,451,261  (2021: GHS 1,430,511,547)
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT ON THE SUMMARY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
To the Members of Absa Bank Ghana Limited
Opinion
The summary ﬁnancial statements, which comprise the summary statement of 
ﬁnancial position as at 31 December 2022, and the summary statements of 
comprehensive income, changes in equity and cash ﬂows for the year then ended 
and related notes, are derived from the audited ﬁnancial statements of Absa Bank 
Ghana Limited for the year ended 31 December 2022. 
In our opinion, the accompanying summary ﬁnancial statements are a fair 
summary of the audited ﬁnancial statements, in accordance with the basis 
described in note 2. 
Summary Financial Statements 
The summary ﬁnancial statements do not contain all the disclosures required by 
International Financial Reporting Standards and in the manner required by the 
Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking 
Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) applied in the preparation of the audited ﬁnancial 
statements of Absa Bank Ghana Limited. Reading the summary ﬁnancial 
statements and our report thereon, therefore, is not a substitute for reading the 
audited ﬁnancial statements and our report thereon. The summary ﬁnancial 
statements and the audited ﬁnancial statements do not reﬂect the effects of 
events that occurred subsequent to the date of our report on the audited ﬁnancial 
statements.
The Audited Financial Statements and Our Report Thereon
We expressed an unmodiﬁed audit opinion on the audited ﬁnancial statements in 
our report dated 5 April 2023. That report also includes the communication of key 
audit matters. Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional 
judgement, were of most signiﬁcance in our audit of the ﬁnancial statements for 
the current period.
Directors’ Responsibility for the Summary Financial Statements
The Directors are responsible for the preparation of the summary ﬁnancial 
statements in accordance with the basis described in the note 2.Auditor’s Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on whether the summary ﬁnancial 
statements are a fair summary of the audited ﬁnancial statements based on 
our procedures, which were conducted in accordance with International 
Standard on Auditing (ISA) 810 (Revised), Engagements to Report on Summary 
Financial Statements.
The engagement partner on the audit resulting in this independent auditor’s 
report is Labaran Amidu (ICAG/P/1472).
................................................................
FOR AND ON BEHALF OF:
KPMG: (ICAG/F/2023/038)
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
13 YIYIWA DRIVE, ABELENKPE
P O BOX GP 242
ACCRA
21 April 2023
Disclosures – Quantitative 
             
Capital adequacy ratio 
Non-performing loan (NPL) ratio 
Liquid ratio 
Disclosures – Qualitative
Dominant Risks
The Bank has exposure to the following risks from its use of ﬁnancial 
instruments and from operations:
•   Credit risk
•   Liquidity risk
•   Market risk
•   Operational risk
The board of directors has overall responsibility for the establishment and 
oversight of the Bank’s risk management framework. The board has 
established the Bank’s Asset and Liability (ALCO) and the Credit and 
Operational Risk committees, which are responsible for developing and 
monitoring the Bank’s risk management policies in their speciﬁed areas. 
Other disclosures
1. For the period under review, the bank did not record any statutory liquidity    
    breaches and therefore did not incur any sanctions.
  2022 2021 
(a) Default in statutory liquidity  Nil Nil 
(b) Sanctions (GHS’000)  Nil Nil 
2.  Other regulatory breaches (including onsite examination).
  2022 2021 
(a) Number of breaches  2 1 
(b) Sanctions (GHS’000)  120 12 
3.  The summary ﬁnancial statements do not contain any untrue statements,   
    misleading facts or omit material facts, to the best of our knowledge.
 
            Signed                                                                                                Signed_________________                                                                    ___________________
Frances Adu-Mante                           Abena Osei-Poku (Mrs)      
Chairperson                           Managing DirectorNotes to the Summary Financial Statements (Continued)
Absa Bank Ghana Limited. Registration no. CS144072016. Regulated by Bank of Ghana. Toll free: 0800 222 333             2022                                 2021
19.47%                         23.09%
15.96%                           7.20%
67.65%                         75.59%


Extracted from: absa-financial-statement-2020.pdf
Audited  Condensed Financial Statements  
31 December 2020
Condensed Statement of Comprehensive Income 
for the year ended 31 December 2020
(all amounts are expressed in thousands of Ghana Cedis)Condensed Statement of Financial Position 
as at 31 December 2020
(all amounts are expressed in thousands of Ghana Cedis)
Condensed Statement of Changes in Equity 
for the year ended 31 December 2020
 (all amounts are expressed in thousands of Ghana Cedis)
2020
Balance as at 1 January 400,000 683,756 485,784 112,453 (48,871) 1,633,122
Total comprehensive income      
Proﬁt for the year   - 471,128  -  -  - 471,128
Other comprehensive income      
Deﬁned beneﬁt plan actuarial gain  -  -  -  - 1,823 1,823
ECL on investments at FVOCI  -  -  -  - 7,856 7,856
Release to proﬁt or loss - FVOCI assets  -  -  -  - (2,444) (2,444)
Fair value gain on ﬁnancial assets at FVOCI  -  -  -  - 37,154 37,154
Total other comprehensive income  -  -  -  - 44,389 44,389
Total comprehensive income  - 471,128  -  - 44,389 515,517
Transactions with equity holders of the Bank      
Contributions and distributions      
Share based payment transactions  -  -  -  - (233) (233)
Dividends to equity holders  - (200,000)  -  -  - (200,000)
Total contributions and distributions   (200,000)  -  - (233) (200,233)
Other transfers      
Transfer from credit risk reserve  - 72,318  - (72,318)  -  -
Transfer to statutory reserve  - (58,891) 58,891  -  -  -
Total other transfers  - 13,427 58,891 (72,318)  -  -
Balance at 31 December 400,000 968,311 544,675 40,135 (4,715) 1,948,406  Stated capital Retained Statutory  Credit risk  Other Total
   earnings reserve  reserves  reserves
GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000  2020 2019
   
Interest income calculated using the effective interest method 1,340,468 1,120,210
Interest expense  (375,330) (337,191)
Net interest income  965,138 783,019
Fees and commission income  175,526 161,740
Fees and commission expense  (25,030) (10,864)
Net fees and commission income  150,496 150,876
Net trading income  283,543 229,938
Other income  178 245
Net trading and other income  283,721 230,183
Revenue  1,399,355 1,164,078
Impairment loss on ﬁnancial assets  (137,613) (60,204)
Personnel expenses  (299,502) (279,774)
Depreciation and amortisation  (31,670) (25,070)
Other expenses  (247,407) (123,012)
Proﬁt before tax  683,163 676,018
Income tax expense  (212,035) (207,395)
Proﬁt after tax attributable to equity holders of the Bank 471,128 468,623
Other comprehensive income   
Items that will not be reclassiﬁed to proﬁt or loss:   
Actuarial gain/(loss) on deﬁned beneﬁt liability  1,823 (15,103)
Items that are or may be reclassiﬁed to proﬁt or loss:   
Impairment loss on investment securities at FVOCI  7,856 4,959
Release to proﬁt or loss on derecognised FVOCI assets (net of tax) (2,444) (509)
Net gain/ (loss) on fair value on ﬁnancial assets at FVOCI (net of tax)  37,154 (12,857)
Other comprehensive income, net of tax  44,389 (23,510)
Total comprehensive income  515,517 445,113
Proﬁt attributable to:   
Controlling equity holders of the Bank  471,128 468,623
Total comprehensive income attributable to:   
Controlling equity holders of the Bank  515,517 445,113
Earnings per share    
Basic & Diluted earnings per share (Ghana Cedis per share) 5.24 5.21
GHS’000 GHS’000
  2020 2019
Assets     
Cash and cash equivalents  1,510,299 1,532,655
Non pledged trading assets  2,192,367 2,866,365
Derivative assets  39,283 54,425
Loans and advances to banks  244,620 209,501
Loans and advances to customers  4,481,173 4,082,295
Investment securities  3,318,260 2,550,401
Other assets  539,790 319,669
Property and equipment  161,460 105,174
Intangible assets  1,481 771
Deferred tax assets  57,740 51,290
Total assets  12,546,473 11,772,546
Liabilities   
Derivative liabilities  50,312 33,140
Deposits from banks  384,356 414,089
Deposits from customers  6,506,449 5,142,907
Borrowings  2,695,019 3,927,240
Current tax liabilities  3,185 1,691
Retirement beneﬁt obligation  88,478 75,669
Other liabilities  870,268 544,688
Total liabilities  10,598,067 10,139,424
Capital and reserves   
Stated capital  400,000 400,000
Retained earnings  968,311 683,756
Statutory reserve  544,675 485,784
Credit risk reserve  40,135 112,453
Other reserves  (4,715) (48,871)
Total equity   1,948,406 1,633,122
Total equity and liabilities  12,546,473 11,772,546
GHS’000 GHS’0002019
Balance at 1 January 400,000 491,108 368,628 103,634 (25,897) 1,337,473
Total comprehensive income      
Proﬁt for the year   - 468,623  -  -  - 468,623
Other comprehensive income      
Deﬁned beneﬁt plan actuarial loss  -  -  -  - (15,103) (15,103)
ECL on investments at FVOCI  -  -  -  - 4,959 4,959
Release to proﬁt or loss - FVOCI assets  -  -  -  - (509) (509)
Fair value loss on ﬁnancial assets at FVOCI  -  -  -  - (12,857) (12,857)
Total other comprehensive income  -  -  -  - (23,510) (23,510)
Total comprehensive income   - 468,623  -  - (23,510) 445,113
Transactions with equity holders of the Bank      
Contributions and distributions      
Share based payment transactions  -   -  -  - 536 536
Dividends to equity holders -  (150,000)  -  -  - (150,000)
Total contributions and distributions -  (150,000)  -  - 536 (149,464)
Other transfers      
Transfer to credit risk reserve  - (8,819) -  8,819 -   -
Transfer to statutory reserve  - (117,156) 117,156  - -   -
Total other transfers  - (125,975) 117,156 8,819 -  -
Balance at 31 December 400,000 683,756 485,784 112,453 (48,871) 1,633,122  Stated capital Retained Statutory  Credit risk  Other Total
   earnings reserve  reserves  reserves
GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000 GHS’000
Condensed Statement of Cash Flows 
for the year ended 31 December 2020
(all amounts are expressed in thousands of Ghana Cedis)(all amounts are expressed in thousands of Ghana Cedis)Condensed Statement of Changes in Equity 
for the year ended 31 December 2020
Notes to the ﬁnancial statements
Reporting entity
Absa Bank Ghana Limited (the "Bank") is a private company incorporated and 
domiciled in Ghana. The address of the Bank's registered ofﬁce is Absa Head 
Ofﬁce, High Street, P. O. Box 2949, Accra. The Bank primarily is involved in 
universal banking, spanning wholesale and retail banking, investment and 
asset management. The annual audited ﬁnancial statements were 
authorised for issue on 24 March 2021. 
Absa Bank Ghana Limited is a wholly owned subsidiary of Absa Group 
Limited (AGL), a limited liability company incorporated in the Republic of 
South Africa.
Basis of preparation
The condensed ﬁnancial statements have been extracted from the audited 
ﬁnancial statements which are prepared in accordance with International 
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as issued by the International 
Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and adopted by the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants Ghana (ICAG) and in a manner required by the 
Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised 
Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) and are consistent with 
those applied in the preparation of the annual audited ﬁnancial statements.
The condensed ﬁnancial statements have also been prepared in line with 
the Bank of Ghana Guide for Publication for Banks and Bank of Ghana 
licensed ﬁnancial institutions. 
The annual audited ﬁnancial statements are available for inspection at the 
Head Ofﬁce of Absa Bank Ghana Limited.
 
Use of judgements and estimates
In the preparation of the annual ﬁnancial statements, management is 
required to make judgements, estimates and assumptions that affect 
reported income, expenses, assets, liabilities and disclosure of contingent 
assets and liabilities.  Use of available information and the application of 
judgement is inherent in the formation of estimates. Actual results in the 
future could differ from these estimates, which may be material to the 
ﬁnancial statements within the next ﬁnancial period. The impact of such 
revisions is recognised in the period in which the estimates are revised and 
any future period impacted.
Interest income and expenses
Interest income and expense are recognised in proﬁt or loss using the 
effective interest method. The ‘effective interest rate’ is the rate that 
exactly discounts estimated future cash payments or receipts through the 
expected life of the ﬁnancial instrument to:
• the gross carrying amount of the ﬁnancial asset; or• the amortised cost of the ﬁnancial liability.
Fee and commission income
Net fee and commission income that are integral to the effective interest rate on 
a ﬁnancial asset or ﬁnancial liability are included in the determination of 
effective interest rate. 
Fee and commission income from contracts with customers is measured based 
on the consideration speciﬁed in a contract with a customer. The Bank 
recognises revenue when it transfers control over a service to a customer.
Revenue from account service and servicing fees is recognised over time as the 
services are provided. Revenue related to transactions is recognised at the point 
in time when the transaction takes place.
Other fee and commission expenses relate mainly to transaction and service 
fees, which are expensed as the services are received.
 
Net trading income
Net trading income comprises gains less losses related to trading assets and 
liabilities and includes all fair value changes, interest, dividends and foreign 
exchange differences.
Letters of credit and guarantees
Letters of credit and guarantees amounted to GHS 1,227,001,795 
(2019: GHS 1,024,616,113)
Undrawn loan commitments
Undrawn formal stand-by loan and other facilities, credit lines and other 
commitments to lend  GHS  1,045,067,337 (2019: GHS 1,825,199,100)
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT 
To the Members of Absa Bank Ghana Limited
Opinion
The condensed ﬁnancial statements, which comprise the statement of ﬁnancial 
position as at 31 December 2020, and the statements of comprehensive 
income, changes in equity and cash ﬂows for the year then ended and related 
notes, are derived from the audited ﬁnancial statements of Absa Bank Ghana 
Limited for the year ended 31 December 2020. 
In our opinion, the accompanying condensed ﬁnancial statements are consis-
tent, in all material respects, with the audited ﬁnancial statements, in accor-
dance with the basis described in the notes.
Condensed Financial Statements 
The condensed ﬁnancial statements do not contain all the disclosures required 
by International Financial Reporting Standards and in the manner required by 
the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Tak-
ing Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) applied in the preparation of the audited 
ﬁnancial statements of Absa Bank Ghana Limited. Reading the condensed 
ﬁnancial statements and our report thereon, therefore, is not a substitute for 
reading the audited ﬁnancial statements and our report thereon.
The Audited Financial Statements and Our Report Thereon
We expressed an unmodiﬁed audit opinion on the audited ﬁnancial statements 
in our report dated 24 March 2021. That report also includes the communica-
tion of key audit matters. Key audit matters are those matters that in our 
professional judgement, were of most signiﬁcance in our audit of the ﬁnancial 
statements for the current period.
Directors’ Responsibility for the Condensed Financial Statements
The directors are responsible for the preparation of the condensed ﬁnancial 
statements in accordance with the basis described in the notes.
Auditor’s Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on whether the condensed ﬁnancial 
statements are consistent, in all material respects, with the audited ﬁnancial 
statements based on our procedures, which were conducted in accordance with International Standard on Auditing (ISA) 810 (Revised), Engagements to 
Report on Summary Financial Statements.
The engagement partner on the audit resulting in this independent auditor’s 
report is Labaran Amidu (ICAG/P/1472).
.............................................................
For and on behalf of:
KPMG: (ICAG/F/2021/038)
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
13 YIYIWA DRIVE, ABELENKPE
P O BOX GP 242
ACCRA
26 March 2021
Disclosures – Quantitative 
 2020 2019
Capital adequacy ratio* 22.68% 20.09%
Non-performing loan (NPL) ratio 7.70% 6.64%
Liquid ratio 76.63%     78.32%
*The 2019 Capital adequacy ratio has been represented in line with the 
Capital Requirement Directive (CRD) for comparative purposes.
Disclosures – Qualitative
Dominant Risks
The Bank has exposure to the following risks from its use of ﬁnancial 
instruments and from operations:
• Credit risk
• Liquidity risk
• Market risk
• Operational risk
The Board of Directors has overall responsibility for the establishment and 
oversight of the Bank’s risk management framework. The board has estab-
lished the Bank’s Asset and Liability (ALCO) and the Credit and Operational 
Risk committees, which are responsible for developing and monitoring the 
Bank’s risk management policies in their speciﬁed areas. 
Other disclosures
1. The condensed ﬁnancial statements have been prepared on a going 
 concern basis. We have no plans or intentions, for example to dispose
  off the business or cease operations that may materially alter the
  carrying value or classiﬁcation of assets and liabilities reﬂected in the
  condensed ﬁnancial statements.
2.  These policies have been consistently applied to all the years.
3. For the period under review, the bank did not record any statutory
 liquidity breaches and therefore did not incur any sanctions.
   2020 2019
 (a)  Default in statutory liquidity Nil Nil  
 (b)  Sanctions Nil Nil 
4. Other regulatory breaches (including onsite examination)
 (a)  Number of breaches  1 6
 (b)  Total sanctions (GHS’000)  69 306
5. The ﬁnancial statements do not contain any untrue statements,
  misleading facts or omit material facts, to the best of our knowledge.
Signed:
  2020  2019
Cash ﬂow from operating activities
Proﬁt after tax  471,128 468,623
Adjustments for:   
 Depreciation and amortisation   31,670 25,070
 Net impairment loss on ﬁnancial assets   137,613 60,204
 Income tax expense  212,035 207,395
 Net interest income  (965,138) (783,019)
 Accrued non interest income  (153,437) (97,376)
 Accrued operating expenses  64,939 (5,595)
 Equity settled share based payments  (233) 536
 Loss on disposal of property and equipment  1,154 1
  (200,269) (124,161)
Changes in:   
 Non pledged trading assets  703,706 (975,501)
 Loans and advances to banks  (35,235) 25,003
 Loans and advances to customers  (579,300) (1,143,306)
 Other assets  80,365 (15,074)
 Deposits from banks  11,551 206,338
 Deposits from customers  1,359,093 408,074
 Other liabilities   88,872 85,618
  1,428,783 (1,533,009)
Interest received  1,354,137 1,094,721
Interest paid  (416,034) (300,956)
Taxes paid  (228,561) (221,186)
Net cash ﬂows from operating activities  2,138,325 (960,430)
Cash ﬂows from investing activities   
Acquisition of investment securities  (1,784,183) (1,499,211)
Proceeds from sale of investment securities  1,062,604 1,252,701
Acquisition of property and equipment  (64,706) (46,227)
Proceeds from disposal of property and equipment 123 22
Acquisition of intangible assets  (1,027) (680)
Net cash ﬂows used in investing activities  (787,189) (293,395)
Financing activities   
Repayment of lease liability  (7,627) (6,616)
Proceeds from borrowed funds  2,225,617 3,707,912
Repayment of borrowed funds  (3,466,915) (2,178,343)
Dividends paid  (200,000) (150,000)
Net cash used in ﬁnancing activities  (1,448,925) 1,372,953
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents  (97,789) 119,128
Balance at beginning  1,532,655 1,336,090
Effect of exchange rate ﬂuctuations on cash and cash 
equivalents held  75,433 77,437
Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December  1,510,299 1,532,655
GHS’000 GHS’000Absa Bank Ghana Limited. Registration no. CS144072016. Regulated by Bank of Ghana. Toll free: 0800 222 333Reporting entity
Absa Bank Ghana Limited (the "Bank") is a private company incorporated and 
domiciled in Ghana. The address of the Bank's registered ofﬁce is Absa Head 
Ofﬁce, High Street, P. O. Box 2949, Accra. The Bank primarily is involved in 
universal banking, spanning wholesale and retail banking, investment and 
asset management. The annual audited ﬁnancial statements were 
authorised for issue on 24 March 2021. 
Absa Bank Ghana Limited is a wholly owned subsidiary of Absa Group 
Limited (AGL), a limited liability company incorporated in the Republic of 
South Africa.
Basis of preparation
The condensed ﬁnancial statements have been extracted from the audited 
ﬁnancial statements which are prepared in accordance with International 
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as issued by the International 
Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and adopted by the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants Ghana (ICAG) and in a manner required by the 
Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised 
Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) and are consistent with 
those applied in the preparation of the annual audited ﬁnancial statements.
The condensed ﬁnancial statements have also been prepared in line with 
the Bank of Ghana Guide for Publication for Banks and Bank of Ghana 
licensed ﬁnancial institutions. 
The annual audited ﬁnancial statements are available for inspection at the 
Head Ofﬁce of Absa Bank Ghana Limited.
 
Use of judgements and estimates
In the preparation of the annual ﬁnancial statements, management is 
required to make judgements, estimates and assumptions that affect 
reported income, expenses, assets, liabilities and disclosure of contingent 
assets and liabilities.  Use of available information and the application of 
judgement is inherent in the formation of estimates. Actual results in the 
future could differ from these estimates, which may be material to the 
ﬁnancial statements within the next ﬁnancial period. The impact of such 
revisions is recognised in the period in which the estimates are revised and 
any future period impacted.
Interest income and expenses
Interest income and expense are recognised in proﬁt or loss using the 
effective interest method. The ‘effective interest rate’ is the rate that 
exactly discounts estimated future cash payments or receipts through the 
expected life of the ﬁnancial instrument to:
• the gross carrying amount of the ﬁnancial asset; or• the amortised cost of the ﬁnancial liability.
Fee and commission income
Net fee and commission income that are integral to the effective interest rate on 
a ﬁnancial asset or ﬁnancial liability are included in the determination of 
effective interest rate. 
Fee and commission income from contracts with customers is measured based 
on the consideration speciﬁed in a contract with a customer. The Bank 
recognises revenue when it transfers control over a service to a customer.
Revenue from account service and servicing fees is recognised over time as the 
services are provided. Revenue related to transactions is recognised at the point 
in time when the transaction takes place.
Other fee and commission expenses relate mainly to transaction and service 
fees, which are expensed as the services are received.
 
Net trading income
Net trading income comprises gains less losses related to trading assets and 
liabilities and includes all fair value changes, interest, dividends and foreign 
exchange differences.
Letters of credit and guarantees
Letters of credit and guarantees amounted to GHS 1,227,001,795 
(2019: GHS 1,024,616,113)
Undrawn loan commitments
Undrawn formal stand-by loan and other facilities, credit lines and other 
commitments to lend  GHS  1,045,067,337 (2019: GHS 1,825,199,100)
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT 
To the Members of Absa Bank Ghana Limited
Opinion
The condensed ﬁnancial statements, which comprise the statement of ﬁnancial 
position as at 31 December 2020, and the statements of comprehensive 
income, changes in equity and cash ﬂows for the year then ended and related 
notes, are derived from the audited ﬁnancial statements of Absa Bank Ghana 
Limited for the year ended 31 December 2020. 
In our opinion, the accompanying condensed ﬁnancial statements are consis-
tent, in all material respects, with the audited ﬁnancial statements, in accor-
dance with the basis described in the notes.
Condensed Financial Statements 
The condensed ﬁnancial statements do not contain all the disclosures required 
by International Financial Reporting Standards and in the manner required by 
the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Tak-
ing Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) applied in the preparation of the audited 
ﬁnancial statements of Absa Bank Ghana Limited. Reading the condensed 
ﬁnancial statements and our report thereon, therefore, is not a substitute for 
reading the audited ﬁnancial statements and our report thereon.
The Audited Financial Statements and Our Report Thereon
We expressed an unmodiﬁed audit opinion on the audited ﬁnancial statements 
in our report dated 24 March 2021. That report also includes the communica-
tion of key audit matters. Key audit matters are those matters that in our 
professional judgement, were of most signiﬁcance in our audit of the ﬁnancial 
statements for the current period.
Directors’ Responsibility for the Condensed Financial Statements
The directors are responsible for the preparation of the condensed ﬁnancial 
statements in accordance with the basis described in the notes.
Auditor’s Responsibility
Our responsibility is to express an opinion on whether the condensed ﬁnancial 
statements are consistent, in all material respects, with the audited ﬁnancial 
statements based on our procedures, which were conducted in accordance Notes to the ﬁnancial statements (cont’d)
with International Standard on Auditing (ISA) 810 (Revised), Engagements to 
Report on Summary Financial Statements.
The engagement partner on the audit resulting in this independent auditor’s 
report is Labaran Amidu (ICAG/P/1472).
.............................................................
For and on behalf of:
KPMG: (ICAG/F/2021/038)
CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS
13 YIYIWA DRIVE, ABELENKPE
P O BOX GP 242
ACCRA
26 March 2021
Disclosures – Quantitative 
 2020 2019
Capital adequacy ratio* 22.68% 20.09%
Non-performing loan (NPL) ratio 7.70% 6.64%
Liquid ratio 76.63%     78.32%
*The 2019 Capital adequacy ratio has been represented in line with the 
Capital Requirement Directive (CRD) for comparative purposes.
Disclosures – Qualitative
Dominant Risks
The Bank has exposure to the following risks from its use of ﬁnancial 
instruments and from operations:
• Credit risk
• Liquidity risk
• Market risk
• Operational risk
The Board of Directors has overall responsibility for the establishment and 
oversight of the Bank’s risk management framework. The board has estab-
lished the Bank’s Asset and Liability (ALCO) and the Credit and Operational 
Risk committees, which are responsible for developing and monitoring the 
Bank’s risk management policies in their speciﬁed areas. 
Other disclosures
1. The condensed ﬁnancial statements have been prepared on a going 
 concern basis. We have no plans or intentions, for example to dispose
  off the business or cease operations that may materially alter the
  carrying value or classiﬁcation of assets and liabilities reﬂected in the
  condensed ﬁnancial statements.
2.  These policies have been consistently applied to all the years.
3. For the period under review, the bank did not record any statutory
 liquidity breaches and therefore did not incur any sanctions.
   2020 2019
 (a)  Default in statutory liquidity Nil Nil  
 (b)  Sanctions Nil Nil 
4. Other regulatory breaches (including onsite examination)
 (a)  Number of breaches  1 6
 (b)  Total sanctions (GHS’000)  69 306
5. The ﬁnancial statements do not contain any untrue statements,
  misleading facts or omit material facts, to the best of our knowledge.
Signed:
 Frances Adu-Mante Abena Osei-Poku       
          Chairperson Managing Director


Extracted from: ADB-2022-ANNUAL-REPORT-AND-FINANCIAL-STATEMENTS-1.pdf


Extracted from: FINANCIALS-2021-ADB-final-signed.pdf


Extracted from: GCB AR 2021_FINAL WEB.pdf
www.gcbbank.com.gh/two.lf/zero.lf/two.lf/two.lf2021
Scan to download
e-version/two.lf/zero.lf/two.lf/two.lfSocial Media Handles & Other Contact Details
GCB Bank ’s O/uniFB03cial 
WhatsApp Line
  GCBBankPLC
www.gcbbank.com.gh
/zero.lf/three.lf/zero.lf/two.lf 66/three.lf  /nine.lf6/four.lf/zero.lf/three.lf/zero.lf/two.lf 66/four.lf  /nine.lf/one.lf/zero.lf-/one.lf8
/zero.lf/three.lf/zero.lf/two.lf 6/seven.lf/two.lf 8/five.lf/two.lf-/four.lf
/zero.lf/three.lf/zero.lf/two.lf 6/seven.lf/two.lf 8/five.lf/nine.lf-6/five.lf
GCBPROFILE OF GCB BANK PLC
GCB Bank Plc is Ghana’s ﬁrst indigenous bank and the largest with over 180 branches and 300 ATMs nationwide. 
With over 68 years banking experience and rated as Ghana’s safest bank, GCB has undergone various transforma-tions to comprehensively dominate Ghana’s banking industry. The Bank seeks to consistently provide world class services and superior value for customers, shareholders and other stakeholders.  
HISTORY AND KEY MILEST ONES
GCB Bank Plc was established in May 1953 as the Bank of the Gold Coast to provide banking services to indigenous 
businesses to help drive the country’s socio-economic development. In 1957, when Ghana attained independence, 
the Bank of Ghana was established as the Central Bank. The Bank of the Gold Coast was then renamed Ghana Commercial Bank to focus speciﬁcally on commercial banking activities.
In 1996, it listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange and in 2014, the  Bank rebranded from Ghana Commercial Bank to 
GCB Bank Limited to  refresh its image and project a renewed dynamism. 
In 2017, GCB assumed selected deposits and loans of two indigenous banks in a single day; a transaction which 
hitherto was unprecedented in Ghana's banking industry, as part of its strategy of total market dominance.The bigger and better GCB is currently focused on process transformation and digitization to deliver world class services and superior value to stakeholders.
In 2021, the Bank’s name was changed to GCB Bank Plc to reﬂect its status as a listed company as mandated by law.
GCB Bank Plc
www. gcbbank.com. gh
VISION MISSION
To be the 
leading Bank in 
all our marketsTo provide ﬁrst class 
banking solutions for 
our customers and 
value for all 
stakeholders.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 20213
Notice of Annual General Meeting
Corporate InformationBoard of DirectorsExecutive Committee (EXCO)
Five Year Financial Summary
Financial Highlights
Chairman’s StatementManaging Director’s ReviewReport of the DirectorsCorporate Governance StatementIndependent Auditor’s ReportStatements of Proﬁt or Loss and Other 
Comprehensive Income
Statements of Financial PositionStatements of Changes in EquityStatements of Cash FlowsNotes to the Financial StatementsValue Added StatementShareholders’ InformationAgents/Correspondent BanksList of BranchesInvitation and Form of ProxyWhat is in this Report
05
06
07
15
21
23
24
28
36
44
54
59
61
63
67
69
151
153
154
156
171As at 31st December 2021, Social Security and National 
Insurance Trust (SSNIT) had 29.89% shares in the Bank, while the Government of Ghana had 21.36% and various institutions and individuals held 48.75% of the shares.
GCB prides itself as Ghana’s most welcoming bank, 
offering accessible financial support wherever it is needed through helpful service and expert solutions, to improve 
businesses and enrich people’s lives. 
The bank’s service proposition is structured to serve every 
facet of the customer’s lifecycle and all types of businesses operating in diverse sectors of the economy irrespective 
of size. The Bank has also developed unique solutions to 
serve the needs of Ghanaian residents abroad.
GCB’s service proposition is anchored by a strong asset 
base, competitive pricing, an unmatched branch network, extensive ATM network, strong investment in technology and infrastructure, robust risk management systems, 
strong governance structures and a fundamental 
understanding of customer needs driven by a mix of experience, strong customer relationship management and an unrelenting pursuit for excellence.    
Ghana’s largest indigenous Bank, GCB Bank continues to 
live up to its mantra; “your bank for life”, by making substantial investments in Corporate Social Responsibility 
despite the difficult operating environment occasioned by 
the Covid-19 pandemic. Over the past 5 years, the Bank has invested over GHS33 million in the areas of education, health, culture, financial inclusion, tourism, environment, and sports.  
In 2021, the Bank made several CSR investments anchored 
around the Bank’s revised CSR policy which is meant to give even more impetus to the Bank’s societal investment efforts. 
A few of the bank’s CSR initiatives for the year include, 
sponsorship of the Royal Dialogue on Climate Change and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) organized as a precursor to the 26th United Nations Conference of the Parties on Climate Change (COP26), GHS 100,000 towards the Black Stars’ preparation for the 2022 World Cup and African Cup of Nations tournaments, over GHS400,000 towards less endowed sports and a GHS200,000 contribution towards the establishment of the first Women’s School of Soccer Excellence in West Africa. 
In the fight against Covid-19 pandemic, GCB Bank has 
invested over GHS5 million over the past two years. Other notable initiatives in recent times include the renovation 
of the Usher Polyclinic and construction of an Operating 
Theatre for the Clinic, Construction of Renal Dialysis Unit at 37 Military Hospital, provision of theatre beds and lamps to the Winneba Municipal Hospital, the refurbishment of the Children and Maternity Wards at Akim Oda Government Hospital, cladding and seating for the Baby Unit at Tema Polyclinic.GCB Bank is rated Ghana’s safest Bank by Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s and Fitch and the most compliant Bank in Africa by the Association for Certified Compliance 
Professionals in Africa (ACCPA).
The Bank has won numerous awards in the industry. 
Notable among them are:
• The Financial Business of the Decade by the Millennium 
Excellence Award Foundation (2021)
• AMA COVID-19 Award in recognition of GCB’s Covid-19 contributions (2020)
• The Best bank in Ghana in Anti-Money Laundering (AML) Compliance and Africa’s Best Bank in Compliance 
(2019)
• Most Compliant Bank 2017/2018 - The Association of 
Certi fied Compliance Professionals Africa (ACCPA)
• Safest financial institution in Ghana - Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s and Fitch 2017
• Best Money Transfer Bank in Ghana - RIA 2017 
• Most Active E-zwich Bank – 2017. 
• Overall Best Taxpayer 2016, Ghana Revenue Authority
•  The Most Active E-zwich Bank, 2015
GCB Bank believes that Technology is a key driver for improving efficiency, business performance, customer engagement, profitability and growth in today’s ever-changing and challenging banking environment. Therefore, the bank is relentlessly pursuing innovative ways of leveraging on innovative technologies to deliver 
end-to-end digital banking solutions to enhance its 
service offerings and deliver even superior value. 
In 2020, GCB Bank became the first Bank to launch a 
digital mobile money wallet when it launched the G-Money product in January. The digital wallet which is Telco agnostic and fully interoperable allows customers to send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank account by registered users and also perform unique functions including borrowing funds, individual and group savings. It is also accessible across multiple channels such as Unstructured Supplementary Service Data (USSD), GCB Bank’s internet banking platform, Mobile banking application, Point of Sale Device (POS), 
Quick Respond Code (QR code) and Automated Teller 
Machines (ATMs).Service Proposition
Shareholding Structure
Ratings & Awards Won
Technology & Innovation
Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 20215
Notice of Annual General Meeting
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the 28th Annual General Meeting of GCB 
Bank Plc will be held virtually and streamed live online via https://gcbbankagm .com, the Bank’s social media handles (Facebook, Instagram, 
YouTube and Twitter) and  GTV on Friday, 3rd  June, 2022 at 10:00 a.m. to 
transact the following business:
AgendaOrdinary Business
1. To consider and adopt the Financial Statements of the Company for the 
year ended December 31, 2021 together with the Reports of the Directors and Auditors thereon.
2. To declare a Dividend for the year ended December 31, 2021 subject to Bank of Ghana approval.
3. To re-elect the following Directors retiring by rotation:
• Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III
• Mr. Francis Arthur Collins
• Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
4. To re-elect a Director in line with the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive 2018:
• Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu
5. To ratify the appointment of two (2) Non-Executive Directors
• Daniel Tweneboah Asirifi Esq.
• Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah
6. To ratify the appointment of an Executive Director, Wholesale & Investment Banking:
• Mr. Samuel Kwame Yedu Aidoo
7. To fix the remuneration of Directors
8. To authorize the Directors to fix the remuneration of Auditors
Notes
In accordance with Regulatory Guidelines and the Bank’s Constitution, attendance and participation by members or their proxies in this year’s Annual General Meeting of the Bank, shall be strictly virtual (by online participation)
A. Proxy
1. A member is entitled to attend (via online participation) and 
vote or may appoint a proxy to attend (via online participation) and vote on his or her behalf either online or by post. Such a proxy need not be a member of the company.  For a proxy form to be valid for the purposes of the meeting, it must be 
completed and submitted via s hareregistry@ gcb.com.gh  or 
deposited at the Share Registry, GCB Bank Plc, Head Office, 
High Street, Accra, not less than 48 hours before the meeting.  
2. A copy of the Proxy Form can be downloaded from: 
https://gcbbankagm .com  and may be filled and sent via 
email to: shareregistry@ gcb.com.gh.
3. The appointment of a proxy will not prevent a member from 
subsequently attending and voting at the meeting (via online 
participation). Where a member attends the meeting 
(participates online), the proxy appointment shall be deemed to be revoked.
B. Accessing, Participating and Voting at the Virtual AGM
1. To access and vote at the Virtual AGM, a confidential unique 
token number will be sent to shareholders by email and/or 
SMS to give access to the meeting platform, 
https:// www. gcbbankagm .com from 17th May, 2022.2. Shareholders who do not receive this token can contact the 
GCB  Bank  Plc   Share  Registry   on: shareregistry@ gcb.com.gh or 
call 0302-668712, 0244-338508, 0244-318079, 0244-358514 to be sent the unique token any time before the date of the 
AGM.
3. To gain access to the Virtual AGM, shareholders must visit 
https:// www. gcbbankagm .com  and input their unique 
token number on the portal to join in and vote electronically during the meeting. 
4. Further assistance on accessing the meeting and voting 
electronically can be found on https:// www. gcbbankagm .com
5. The AGM Proceedings would be streamed Live on GTV, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube and Instagram for shareholders’ observation and participation.  
C. Other Information
1. Annual Report and other information on the Bank’s AGM 
would be available on the Bank’s websites, https://
gcbbank .com.gh   and https://gcbbankagm .com.gh   
2. For further information contact: 
  The Registrar
  Share Registry
  GCB Bank Plc
  High Street Accra
  Tel: 0302668712, 0244-338508, 0244-318079, 0244-358514
  Email: shareregistry@ gcb.com.gh  DATED THIS 24TH DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2022
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD
(SGD.)
Amma Agyeman Kusi-Appouh
Company Secretar y
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 20216
 DIRECTORS: Mr. Jude Kofi Arthur                       (Board Chairman)
Mr. Kofi Adomakoh                (Managing Director)
Mr. Socrates Afram                                    (DMD-Finance)
Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey   (DMD-Operations)
Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah (Non-Executive Director)
Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins (Non-Executive Director)
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba (Non-Executive Director)
Mrs. Lydia Essah (Non-Executive Director)
Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III (Non-Executive Director)
Mr. Alhassan Adam Yakubu (Non-Executive Director)
Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asirifi (Non-Executive Director - Appointed 24th 
February, 2022)
Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah (Non-Executive Director - Appointed 24th February, 2022)
Mr. Samuel Kwame Yedu Aidoo (Executive Director, Wholesale and 
Investment Banking - Appointed 24th 
February, 2022)
Mr. Nik Amarteifio (Resigned 7th September, 2021)
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Young (Resigned 7th September, 2021)
SECRETARY: Ms. Amma Agyeman Kusi-Appouh
GCB Bank BuildingThorpe Road, J.E.A. Mills High StreetP. O. Box 134, Accra
AUDITOR: Deloitte & ToucheChartered AccountantsThe Deloitte Place, Plot No. 71Off George Walker Bush HighwayNorth DzorwuluP.O.Box GP 453, Accra
REGISTRAR: Share RegistryGCB Bank PlcHead Office, High StreetAccra
REGISTERED OFFICE: GCB Bank BuildingThorpe Road, J.E.A. Mills High StreetP. O. Box 134AccraDigital Address - GA-183-1907Corporate InformationGCB Bank Plc Annual Report 20217
Board of Directors
Board ChairmanMr. Jude Koﬁ  Arthur
Managing DirectorMr. Koﬁ  Adomakoh 
DMD - FinanceMr. Socrates Afram 
DMD - OperationsMr. Emm anuel Odartey L amptey  
Executive Director
(Appointed Feb. 2022)  Mr. Samuel Kwame YeduAidoo
Non-Executive Director
Non-Executive Director
(Appointed Feb. 2022)Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asiriﬁ  Mr. AlhassanAdam Yakubu
Non-Executive Director
(Appointed Feb. 2022) Hon. Dr. St ephen AmoahNon-Executive Director
(Resigned Sept. 2021)Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ o
Non-Executive Director
(Resigned Sept. 2021) Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia YoungeNon-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia  Essah
Non-Executive DirectorNana Ama Ayensua Saara IIINon-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emm anuel R ay Ankrah
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Osmani Aludib a Ayub aGCB Bank Plc Annual Report 20218
Directors’ Profiles
Jude i s an Indepen dent Non- Execu tive Directo r of t he Bank appointed in 2017. H e is the 
Chairman of th e Board and a  Banker w ith over 30 years’ e xperience in Bank ing. He als o serves 
on the  Board of  Ghana In ternati onal Bank Plc.
Jude graduated from th e University of G hana Bu siness School with a Second Class U pper 
degree in 1 976. H e is an honorary  fellow  of the Cha rtered Institute of Bankers Ghana. H e 
comm enced his Bank ing career in Merchan t Bank Ghana Limit ed, now UM B, in  1978 where he 
rose to head the Corporate F inanc e Divisi on of the B ank an d became a Director of Me rban 
Inves tment  Holdings Limited, a su bsidiary of the B ank.
In 19 94, togethe r with a group of  inves tors, he set up First  Atlantic Merchant Bank L imite d 
(FAMBL ) now First Atl antic Bank and was appointed the ﬁrst Managing Directo r of th e Bank i n 
1994. He served  as Managing Directo r until 201 2 when he retired honour ably.
He has acq uired  extensive execu tive ed ucation and is as sociated with such renow ned and 
prestigiou s institutions as  Harvard Busine ss School, INSEADFrance, W harton Bu siness  School- 
University  of Penns ylvania, T empleton College- O xford Universit y, Stanford Univers ity, National 
University  of Sing apore (NUS), As hridge Institute o f Managemen t, Eur omone y Training Sch ool 
and the In ternational Centre fo r Moneta ry and Banking Studi es in Geneva.Mr. Jude Koﬁ  Arthur [ Board Chairman ]
Koﬁ is an experienced banker with over 29 years of professional experience, 20 of which 
have been at the executive management level. Koﬁ has an accumulated worth of experience in project and export ﬁnance, development ﬁnance, corporate and transaction banking, and providing ﬁnancial solutions for international and regional institutional clients. 
Koﬁ was appointed as the Managing Director of GCB Bank Plc in November 2020 after 
11years of employment with African Export-Import (AFRIEXIM) Bank as Director & Global Head, Project and Asset-Based Finance. He led and structured several transactions worth over USD10 billion across the African continent in both public and private sectors.
Koﬁ was appointed as the Executive Director, Corporate & Institutional Banking at Barclays 
Bank Ghana Limited (now ABSA Bank) between 2005 and 2009. He also held key manage-ment roles at Ecobank Ghana Limited and rose to the Head of Institutional Banking Group. His Banking Career started at The Trust Bank Ghana Limited in 1993.
Koﬁ holds an Executive Masters’ Degree in Business Administration and a Bachelor of Science 
in Agriculture majoring in Economics both from the University of Ghana, Legon. 
Mr. Koﬁ Adomakoh [ Managing Director ]
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 20219
Socrates is a ﬁnance professional with 20 years’ experien ce in the Financial Service s Sector. He 
has a breadth of experie nce acro ss strategy; business performance and reporting (ﬁnancial, 
regulator y and statutory); debt and capital raising; business combination; investment and risk 
managemen t.
Other positions include:
• Finance Direc tor of Fidelity Bank Limi ted.
• Hea d of Research and Head of Business Performance & Financial Control, Fidelity Bank L td.
• He worked with UBA (Ghana) as Senior  Analy st deputizing for the Financial Controller .
• He also worked with Export Finance Company Limited as Head of Finance & Administration  
  and General Lea sing & Finance  Company Limited as Analyst for lease credit applications.
Socrates is a fellow  of the Association of Chartered  Certiﬁed Accou ntants (ACCA), He hol ds a 
Master of  Business Administration (Finance) degree  from the U nivers ity of Ghana Business  
School an d a Bachelor o f Commerce degree  from the Un iversi ty of Cape Coast. He is an 
alumnus of the Wharton Executive Education, Univers ity of Pennsylvania, USA.Mr. Socrates Afram [ Deputy Managing Director - Finance ]
Emmanuel is a seasoned  Banker who brings on board over 2 0 years’ multinational  
expere nce, working f or listed compa nies in corp orate and retail banking, asset managemen t, 
securities, brokerage services , pensions, insuran ce and micro-ﬁn ance w ith op erations in 
over 30 African  countries.
He started his career with KPMG and has since he ld other positions in cluding Chief Financial 
O/uniFB03cer  – WAMZ at Ecobank Ghana; Group Head, Finance at Ecob ank Transnational  
Incorporated (Togo),  Group Chief Operating O/uniFB03cer, Letshego Holdings Lim ited (Botswana) 
and Executive Business Manager to the Group CEO - Alexand er Forb es Group Hol dings 
(South Africa).  Emmanuel also held several roles  with Standard  Bank of Sou th Africa Group 
in South Africa and Ghana.
Mr. Lamptey holds a Bachelor of  Commerce d egree fr om Univers ity of C ape Coast, Ghana 
and is a fellow  of Associat ion of Chartered Certiﬁed Acco untants  (ACCA), United K ingdom.Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey [ Deputy Managing Director - Operations ]
Directors’ Profile (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202110
Sam has a strong focus and understanding of Sub-Saharan African markets.  He has worked in 
Africa an d the UK with structuring, origi nation, trading and execu tion experience in several  
African  market s including but not limited to Nigeria,  Ghana, Kenya, Ta nzania, Uganda, Egypt, 
Ethiopia, and Botswana. 
He started his banking career with Standard Chartered Bank and later worked with Barclays  
Bank across Africa  and in England for 10 years. In his time with Barcla ys, Sam worked  in senior  
roles in the Financial markets business in Ghana and subsequently for three years out of 
London, he managed and coordinated Barcla ys Capital’s structured product o/uniFB00ering (structu red 
assets, Index Products, ALM, Acce ss Trades etc) into and out of Sub-Saharan African  markets.  
He rejoined Barcla ys Africa in  2013 where  Sam was initially the Direc tor, Regional Head, Global  
Markets distribution looki ng after the North Africa and East African  regio ns out of Nairo bi-Ken-
ya and subsequently looki ng after the West African business out of Lago s-Nigeria.  
Prior to joining GCB Bank, Sam worked at Fidelity Bank Ghana Ltd as the Deputy Managing  
Direc tor (Wholesale Banking) with responsibility for the bank’s Corporate Banking, Financial 
Markets and Trea sury, Capital Markets businesses as well as Fidelity Bank’s subsidiaries –  
Fidelity Asia Bank and Fidelity Securi ties Limited. He joined Fidelity Bank in Octo ber 2016 as 
Direc tor of Trea sury and Markets and was appointed Group Hea d, Wholesale Banking in 
Dece mber 2018. He also serve d on the Board of Fidelity Securities Limited. In his time at 
Fidelity bank, Sam was instrumental in the implemen tation of certai n landm ark transactions 
which include the ESLA Bond program me and the Securi tization  of GOG Contractor arrears , 
just to mention a few. 
Sam is a thought leader on African ﬁnancial and Capital marke ts develo pment and is devoted 
to the continuous grow th of businesses and people, with a passion to leaving  things better 
than he found them. Mr. Samuel Kwame Yedu Aidoo [ Executive Director ]
Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah [ Non-Executive Director ]
Ray is an Independent Non-Execu tive Director and the C hairm an of the  Audit Comm ittee of 
the Bank. He  is an experienced Chartered Accou ntant and Chartered Glob al Management 
Acco untant with solid technical  knowledge and excellen t commu nication skills , strong 
analytical skills and an e/uniFB00ec tive team player. 
He is a member of  the Institute of Chartered  Acco untants  of Gha na and a Fellow of the 
Chartered Institute of Management Acco untants  (UK),  Fellow of the British Society o f 
Commerce. He holds a post graduate diploma in Strategic Fin ancial Managem ent from 
Kingston University in the UK. 
He is currently the Deputy Chief Executive (Finance and Administration) of Gha na Cocoa  
Board.Directors’ Profile (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202111
Franc is is an Indepen dent Non-Execu tive Director, and the Chairma n of the Board  
IT/Digitalization & Procurement Committee  of t he Bank. He is an Information Technology 
Consultant whose experience in the management and implementation of Information 
Technology systems spans thirty - eight (38) years. He has in-depth knowledge in the deployment of IT concepts and tools for re-engineering business processes, to enhance customer service delivery, improve productivity and achieve overall business success. He drew 
a lot of experienc e from  engaging in IT c onsultancy services by  executing various I T projects 
both home a nd abroad. 
Mr. Arthur-Collin s is a Fellow - G hana In stitute of I nformation Tech nology  (GH); Me mbe r - 
Institute for the Managemen t of Information Systems (UK);  Member - B ritish Compu ter 
Societ y (UK). He holds M aster’s Degree in I nformation Tech nology  and Bu siness 
Admini stration (IT -MBA) from University of  Leiceste r (UK); D P in Data Proces sing from 
University of  Scienc e and Technology, Ku masi (GH) and Profe ssional Certiﬁc ate in Structu red 
Systems Ana lysis and Desi gn fr om National Cen tre for Informati on Tech nology , Manc hester 
(UK). His skill-set includes professional training in Information Technology Management; 
Information Technology Strategic Planning & Project Management and Advanced Business Management Operations, all from National University of Singapore - Institute of Systems Science, and Strategic Management from Galilee International Management Institute, Israel.
Mr. Arthur-Collin s worked with the Ghana
 Ports and Harbours Authority from 1985 to 2012, 
where he estab lished the Informati on Technology  department, and rose to the position  of 
“Head- of-IT ” with oversi ght r esponsibility for all I T systems an d resources at both Tem a and 
Takoradi po rts, a positi on he held unti l he retired fr om t he Ghana  Ports and Harbours 
Authority i n 2012.  Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins [ Non-Executive Director ]
Osm ani is a Non-Execu tive Director of the Bank. He is  a profession al Accountant and  
Procu rement Expert who has w orked  with Ernst a nd Young, C ommunity Water and 
Sanitation Agen cy (DANIDA P roject), the Unite d Nations Populat ion Fund, E ngen derHealt h, 
West Africa Trad e Hu b- Ghana , Parliament ary C entre- Africa, St anbic Bank, Ghana 
Agricu ltural S ector Investment Programm e and Northern Development Authority. He is 
currently the M anaging Direct or of Nort hern Electricity Distr ibuti on Comp any Lim ited 
(NEDCo).
He is  a Mem ber, Insti tute of Chartered Accou ntants, Ghana; m ember of Chart ered Institute 
of Procu remen t & Supply, a Chartered Banker a nd holds  MA Econ omic Policy  Management  
and B.Com from the University of G hana and Univers ity of Cape-C oast respectively; Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba [ Non-Executive Director ]
Directors’ Profile (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202112
Lydia i s an Independ ent Non-Execut ive Director of the Bank and t he Chairperson of  
the Risk and Co mpliance Comm ittee of the Bank. She b rought t o the Board a wealth of  
bankin g experien ce w hich s pans  over 30 years  in GCB Bank Lim ited, beginning at  the 
branch level and culm inating in the position of Chief  Manager and Area Manager of the 
Tema Zo ne.
As a seas oned Bank Executive, she has a d emonstrated record of exceeding proﬁt targets,
turning around underperform ing u nits and driving increased revenue and  market share.
Mrs. Essah po ssess relevant  experien ce includin g risk managemen t, compliance and 
corp orate govern ance concept s, strategy formulat ion and  implemen tation t hat cont ributes 
to approp riate oversigh t of Banking activities for th e beneﬁ t of its shareholders, customers, 
employees and o ther stakehold ers.
Additionally, she has demonstrated over a long period of  time pers onal integrity , stru ctured  
and strat egic thi nking and analy tical capability to guide major decisions. She has leveraged  
her leadershi p and comm unication skills t o lead  signiﬁcant negot iations and dialogue w ith 
senior executives and colleague board members.
Mrs. Essah holds  a mast er’s degree from  GIMPA (Ghana Inst itute of Managem ent and Public
Administration, MPHIL) and a bachelor’s d egree f rom the Un ivers ity of Ghana. She also has
numerous prof essional d evelop ment  certiﬁcates and programs f rom both international and
nation al levels. Mrs. Lydia Essah  [Non-Executive Director ]
Nana i s the Omanh emaa of t he Denkyira Trad itional Area in the Central Region  of Ghana. 
She is a Non-Executive Direct or of the Bank and the Chairperson of the Board HR and 
Remu neration C ommittee.
Curren tly, N ana is the C hief E xecut ive O/uniFB03cer (CE O) of Nasaa Group of Comp anies and 
serves on t he Board  of Governme nt Special initiatives . She hold s B.Com from th e University 
of Cape Co ast an d Dipl oma i n Bus iness Studi es, Takorad i Polytechn ic. 
On the chi eftaincy and cultu ral fronts , Nana has served  on several Boards an d Committees 
to pr omote traditional govern ance.Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III [ Non-Executive Director ]
Directors’ Profile (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202113
Alhassan is a N on- Executive Director and the C hairm an fo r the Board Cr edit Comm ittee of 
the Bank. H e is an experienced Banker who c ommenc ed his  career with Mercha nt Bank 
Ghana Limite d in Septem ber 19 91 an d late r joined Bank of G hana. He is  curren tly a Business 
Executive.  
He holds M BA F inance (pa rt 1) from the University o f Ghana, Legon; Certiﬁc ate from the 
Financial Institution Ana lysis School of the Federal Reserve Bank , Washington  DC; B.Sc . 
Adm inistrati on, Banking &  Finance, Universit y of Gh ana, Legon (1990). Alhaji Yakubu also 
attended many executive development courses and seminars. He has de ep knowl edge and e xperience in Financial Instituti on Analysis, Corporate  
Governance, Cr edit Managemen t, Treas ury and Investmen t Management , Internal Controls 
and Comp uter Audit.Mr. Alhassan Adam Yakubu [ Non-Executive Director ]
Daniel is a product of University of Ghana’s School of Administration, now known as 
University of Ghana Business School, where he graduated with a Bachelor of Science in Administration (Public Administration option) and followed it up with Master of Public Administration (MPA) degree. 
He enrolled at the Ghana School of Law, called to the Bar and has been a private 
practitioner for over two decades. After his call to the Bar, he joined the Law ﬁrm of Messrs. Akufo-Addo, Prempeh and Co., where he has since 2003 as its O/uniFB03ce Manager. He was appointed a Notary Public in 2019. At the inception of the Ghana Stock Exchange, Mr. Asiriﬁ pursued courses which gained him proﬁciency in its operations and was later engaged as a part time instructor. 
As a Legal practitioner, Kwaku has represented many individuals, Companies, 
Institutions, both local and foreign, and has been involved in the resolutions of many complex legal issues. He brings to the Board a deep and clear understanding of the legal environment in which the Bank operates and an understating of the intricate corporate governance regime of the ﬁnancial services sector. He has been a member of the Legal Service Board since October 2017Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asiriﬁ  [Non-Executive Director ]Board Chairman
Directors’ Profile (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202114
Stephen is a Finance & Investment Consultant, Member of Parliament (MP) for Nhyiaeso 
Constituency in the Ashanti Region, member of the Finance Committee in Parliament and a 
member of the African Parliamentary Union (APU). 
Dr. Amoah is also member of the committee tasked to manage the selection of auditing entity 
that will have the mandate to audit the Auditor General. 
In addition, he is the Chief Executive O/uniFB03cer of Zintex Portfolio Services Limited, a parent 
company with many subsidiaries: Zintex Finance & Investment Consult, Zintex Farms and 
Zintex Construction. 
Formerly, he was the Chief Executive O/uniFB03cer of the Microﬁnance and Small Loans Centre 
(MASLOC) at the O/uniFB03ce of President of Ghana where small and medium size businesses were 
capitalized. Other prior executive roles he held include the Deputy National Health Insurance 
Authority (NHIA) Coordinator and Chief Financial O/uniFB03cer (CFO) of Kencity Group of Companies. 
Dr. Amoah holds a Doctor of Philosophy in Actuarial Science from Kwame Nkrumah University 
of Science and Technology, (KNUST) with the option of Finance and Investment. The research title for Dr. Amoah’s PhD was Optimal Pricing for Risky Assets in a Competitive Market with special emphasis on Finance and Macro-economics. Dr. Amoah hold a Master of Science Degree in Strategic Financial Management from the University of Derby in the United Kingdom and  a Certiﬁcate in Entrepreneurship from MIT in the US. He has BSc. in Computer Science from KNUST. 
He has participated in a number of International Programs: seminars and conferences in 
countries such as Germany, Botswana, Niger, Netherlands, Italy, Portugal and Djibouti. While in Italy, he spoke on the Investment Opportunities within the Sub- Region of Africa and the Challenges Confronting the Continent. 
He has demonstrable expertise in the areas of Corporate Finance and Investment: Strategic 
Financial Management, Mergers & Acquisitions, Budget Setting and Controls, Investment Appraisals & Business Planning, Risk Management, Strategic Management, Designing M&E Tools, Organizational Behavior, Macroeconomics, Modelling and Research & Development.Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah [ Non-Executive Director ]
Directors’ Profile (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202115
Executive Committee (EXCO)Jude i s an Indepen dent Non- Execu tive Directo r of t he Bank appointed in 2017. H e is the 
Chairman of th e Board and a  Banker w ith over 30 years’ e xperience in Bank ing. He als o serves 
on the  Board of  Ghana In ternati onal Bank Plc.
Jude graduated from th e University of G hana Bu siness School with a Second Class U pper 
degree in 1 976. H e is an honorary  fellow  of the Cha rtered Institute of Bankers Ghana. H e 
comm enced his Bank ing career in Merchan t Bank Ghana Limit ed, now UM B, in  1978 where he 
rose to head the Corporate F inanc e Divisi on of the B ank an d became a Director of Me rban 
Inves tment  Holdings Limited, a su bsidiary of the B ank.
In 19 94, togethe r with a group of  inves tors, he set up First  Atlantic Merchant Bank L imite d 
(FAMBL ) now First Atl antic Bank and was appointed the ﬁrst Managing Directo r of th e Bank i n 
1994. He served  as Managing Directo r until 201 2 when he retired honour ably.
He has acq uired  extensive execu tive ed ucation and is as sociated with such renow ned and 
prestigiou s institutions as  Harvard Busine ss School, INSEADFrance, W harton Bu siness  School- 
University  of Penns ylvania, T empleton College- O xford Universit y, Stanford Univers ity, National 
University  of Sing apore (NUS), As hridge Institute o f Managemen t, Eur omone y Training Sch ool 
and the In ternational Centre fo r Moneta ry and Banking Studi es in Geneva.Mr. Jude Koﬁ  Arthur [ Board Chairman ]
Koﬁ is an experienced banker with over 29 years of professional experience, 20 of which 
have been at the executive management level. Koﬁ has an accumulated worth of experience in project and export ﬁnance, development ﬁnance, corporate and transaction banking, and providing ﬁnancial solutions for international and regional institutional clients. 
Koﬁ was appointed as the Managing Director of GCB Bank Plc in November 2020 after 
11years of employment with African Export-Import (AFRIEXIM) Bank as Director & Global Head, Project and Asset-Based Finance. He led and structured several transactions worth over USD10 billion across the African continent in both public and private sectors.
Koﬁ was appointed as the Executive Director, Corporate & Institutional Banking at Barclays 
Bank Ghana Limited (now ABSA Bank) between 2005 and 2009. He also held key manage-ment roles at Ecobank Ghana Limited and rose to the Head of Institutional Banking Group. His Banking Career started at The Trust Bank Ghana Limited in 1993.
Koﬁ holds an Executive Masters’ Degree in Business Administration and a Bachelor of Science 
in Agriculture majoring in Economics both from the University of Ghana, Legon. 
Mr. Koﬁ Adomakoh [ Managing Director ]
Socrates is a ﬁnance professional with 20 years’ experien ce in the Financial Service s Sector. He 
has a breadth of experie nce acro ss strategy; business performance and reporting (ﬁnancial, 
regulator y and statutory); debt and capital raising; business combination; investment and risk 
managemen t.
Other positions include:
• Finance Direc tor of Fidelity Bank Limi ted.
• Hea d of Research and Head of Business Performance & Financial Control, Fidelity Bank L td.
• He worked with UBA (Ghana) as Senior  Analy st deputizing for the Financial Controller .
• He also worked with Export Finance Company Limited as Head of Finance & Administration  
  and General Lea sing & Finance  Company Limited as Analyst for lease credit applications.
Socrates is a fellow  of the Association of Chartered  Certiﬁed Accou ntants (ACCA), He hol ds a 
Master of  Business Administration (Finance) degree  from the U nivers ity of Ghana Business  
School an d a Bachelor o f Commerce degree  from the Un iversi ty of Cape Coast. He is an 
alumnus of the Wharton Executive Education, Univers ity of Pennsylvania, USA.Mr. Socrates Afram [ Deputy Managing Director - Finance ]
Emmanuel is a seasoned  Banker who brings on board over 2 0 years’ multinational  
expere nce, working f or listed compa nies in corp orate and retail banking, asset managemen t, 
securities, brokerage services , pensions, insuran ce and micro-ﬁn ance w ith op erations in 
over 30 African  countries.
He started his career with KPMG and has since he ld other positions in cluding Chief Financial 
O/uniFB03cer  – WAMZ at Ecobank Ghana; Group Head, Finance at Ecob ank Transnational  
Incorporated (Togo),  Group Chief Operating O/uniFB03cer, Letshego Holdings Lim ited (Botswana) 
and Executive Business Manager to the Group CEO - Alexand er Forb es Group Hol dings 
(South Africa).  Emmanuel also held several roles  with Standard  Bank of Sou th Africa Group 
in South Africa and Ghana.
Mr. Lamptey holds a Bachelor of  Commerce d egree fr om Univers ity of C ape Coast, Ghana 
and is a fellow  of Associat ion of Chartered Certiﬁed Acco untants  (ACCA), United K ingdom.Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey [ Deputy Managing Director - Operations ]
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202116Socrates is a ﬁnance professional with 20 years’ experien ce in the Financial Service s Sector. He 
has a breadth of experie nce acro ss strategy; business performance and reporting (ﬁnancial, 
regulator y and statutory); debt and capital raising; business combination; investment and risk 
managemen t.
Other positions include:
• Finance Direc tor of Fidelity Bank Limi ted.
• Hea d of Research and Head of Business Performance & Financial Control, Fidelity Bank L td.
• He worked with UBA (Ghana) as Senior  Analy st deputizing for the Financial Controller .
• He also worked with Export Finance Company Limited as Head of Finance & Administration  
  and General Lea sing & Finance  Company Limited as Analyst for lease credit applications.
Socrates is a fellow  of the Association of Chartered  Certiﬁed Accou ntants (ACCA), He hol ds a 
Master of  Business Administration (Finance) degree  from the U nivers ity of Ghana Business  
School an d a Bachelor o f Commerce degree  from the Un iversi ty of Cape Coast. He is an 
alumnus of the Wharton Executive Education, Univers ity of Pennsylvania, USA.Mr. Socrates Afram [ Deputy Managing Director - Finance ]
Emmanuel is a seasoned  Banker who brings on board over 2 0 years’ multinational  
expere nce, working f or listed compa nies in corp orate and retail banking, asset managemen t, 
securities, brokerage services , pensions, insuran ce and micro-ﬁn ance w ith op erations in 
over 30 African  countries.
He started his career with KPMG and has since he ld other positions in cluding Chief Financial 
O/uniFB03cer  – WAMZ at Ecobank Ghana; Group Head, Finance at Ecob ank Transnational  
Incorporated (Togo),  Group Chief Operating O/uniFB03cer, Letshego Holdings Lim ited (Botswana) 
and Executive Business Manager to the Group CEO - Alexand er Forb es Group Hol dings 
(South Africa).  Emmanuel also held several roles  with Standard  Bank of Sou th Africa Group 
in South Africa and Ghana.
Mr. Lamptey holds a Bachelor of  Commerce d egree fr om Univers ity of C ape Coast, Ghana 
and is a fellow  of Associat ion of Chartered Certiﬁed Acco untants  (ACCA), United K ingdom.Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey [ Deputy Managing Director - Operations ]
Sam has a strong focus and understanding of Sub-Saharan African markets.  He has worked in 
Africa an d the UK with structuring, origi nation, trading and execu tion experience in several  
African  market s including but not limited to Nigeria,  Ghana, Kenya, Ta nzania, Uganda, Egypt, 
Ethiopia, and Botswana. 
He started his banking career with Standard Chartered Bank and later worked with Barclays  
Bank across Africa  and in England for 10 years. In his time with Barcla ys, Sam worked  in senior  
roles in the Financial markets business in Ghana and subsequently for three years out of 
London, he managed and coordinated Barcla ys Capital’s structured product o/uniFB00ering (structu red 
assets, Index Products, ALM, Acce ss Trades etc) into and out of Sub-Saharan African  markets.  
He rejoined Barcla ys Africa in  2013 where  Sam was initially the Direc tor, Regional Head, Global  
Markets distribution looki ng after the North Africa and East African  regio ns out of Nairo bi-Ken-
ya and subsequently looki ng after the West African business out of Lago s-Nigeria.  
Prior to joining GCB Bank, Sam worked at Fidelity Bank Ghana Ltd as the Deputy Managing  
Direc tor (Wholesale Banking) with responsibility for the bank’s Corporate Banking, Financial 
Markets and Trea sury, Capital Markets businesses as well as Fidelity Bank’s subsidiaries –  
Fidelity Asia Bank and Fidelity Securi ties Limited. He joined Fidelity Bank in Octo ber 2016 as 
Direc tor of Trea sury and Markets and was appointed Group Hea d, Wholesale Banking in 
Dece mber 2018. He also serve d on the Board of Fidelity Securities Limited. In his time at 
Fidelity bank, Sam was instrumental in the implemen tation of certai n landm ark transactions 
which include the ESLA Bond program me and the Securi tization  of GOG Contractor arrears , 
just to mention a few. 
Sam is a thought leader on African ﬁnancial and Capital marke ts develo pment and is devoted 
to the continuous grow th of businesses and people, with a passion to leaving  things better 
than he found them. Mr. Samuel Kwame Yedu Aidoo [ Executive Director ]
Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah [ Non-Executive Director ]
Ray is an Independent Non-Execu tive Director and the C hairm an of the  Audit Comm ittee of 
the Bank. He  is an experienced Chartered Accou ntant and Chartered Glob al Management 
Acco untant with solid technical  knowledge and excellen t commu nication skills , strong 
analytical skills and an e/uniFB00ec tive team player. 
He is a member of  the Institute of Chartered  Acco untants  of Gha na and a Fellow of the 
Chartered Institute of Management Acco untants  (UK),  Fellow of the British Society o f 
Commerce. He holds a post graduate diploma in Strategic Fin ancial Managem ent from 
Kingston University in the UK. 
He is currently the Deputy Chief Executive (Finance and Administration) of Gha na Cocoa  
Board.Executive Committee (EXCO) (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202117
Mr. Abel Lomotey Daitey [ Chief Information O/uniFB03cer ]
Samuel is a Risk Management professional with over twenty-ﬁve years’ experience in 
Risk Management in the Financial Services and Oil Sector. He is a Corporate Advisor on Risk Management and has depth of experience in Business Performance and Project Management and Investment.
He has occupied key positions in prestigious institutions like:
•  Ecobank Transnational Incorporated (ETI, Togo),•  Standard Chartered Bank (Singapore and Dubai),•  Burlington Resources – Oil & Gas, United Kingdom,•  Western Atlas – Oil & Gas, United Kingdom.
Mr. Acquah holds a MSc. Geoscience Data (Geo Statistics) from the
Kingston University, United Kingdom, BSc. Geology from the Universityof Ghana and NVQ3 in Programming Methods from Direct Computing,United Kingdom.Abel is an Information Technology specialist with over 20 years of experience 
delivering IT solutions. He has worked in consultancy, trade facilitations, and the 
banking industries.
He is a certiﬁed member of the International Information System Security Certiﬁcation 
Consortium (ISC²) . He also holds certiﬁcations in Enterprise Architecture, Cloud Solution Architecture, and Project Management. Abel graduated with a BSc. Electrical and Electronics Engineering from the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and 
Technology and MBA from the Maastricht School of Management specializing in 
Corporate Strategy.
Before joining GCB, he worked as the Senior Enterprise Architect with E-Process 
International S.A. (Ecobank) where he led the design of solutions and system architec-tures of critical systems, optimizing and migrating Mobile App to the cloud. Previous-ly, he worked as the Project Manager at West Blue Consulting, where he worked with a consortium of public and private organizations to deliver the Paperless Port as part of the Ghana National Single Window Project. Abel started his career in the banking industry with Merchant Bank Ghana Limited, now UMB, where he served as the Head, E-Channels and led the implementation of several digital initiatives including Internet Banking, Card Payment Switch, ATM Rollout, Cash Collection Systems amongst other innovation solutions.
Since joining GCB Bank, he has delivered signiﬁcant system enhancements, e.g. 
upgrading the core banking application. He is working assiduously towards providing the technology platform that will support GCB’s drive to become a Digital Bank.
Mr. Samuel Acquah [ Chief Risk O/uniFB03cer ]
Executive Committee (EXCO) (Continued)
Mr. Anthony Koﬁ Asare [ Treasurer ]
Martin is the Acting Head, Compliance Department of the Bank. He holds an M.A. in Industrial Management from the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST) and has Bachelor of Arts degree in Economics from the University of Ghana, Legon. 
Martin is a Certiﬁed Compliance Specialist and member of the Association of Certiﬁed 
Compliance Professionals in Africa. He has attended several GIABA, Bank of Ghana and Financial Intelligence Centre sponsored programmes at both local and international levels in Compliance, Anti-Money Laundering, Financial Crime, Risk Management among others.
He joined the Bank as Management Trainee in 1991 and rose to become Branch 
Manager in 1997. He has since played various supervisory and managerial roles at Consumer Banking, Risk Management, Internal Audit and Compliance departments. Currently, Martin doubles as the Anti-Money Laundering Reporting O/uniFB03cer (AMLRO) of the Bank.  Koﬁ is a qualiﬁed Lawyer from the Ghana Law School, Accra, and he hasMBA in Finance from the University of Ghana Business School and aBachelor of Arts in Economics from the University of Ghana, Legon.
He is a Member of the Ghana Bar Association, and also ACI Certiﬁed in
both Dealing and Operations.
Koﬁ joined GCB in November, 1991 at the Planning and Research Division
of the Bank and rose to become the Head of the Division. He has heldvarious positions including the Chief Dealer of the Bank. In October, 1999he was transferred to the Treasury Department and rose to become theHead of Treasury Department in August, 2008 to present.
Mr. Martin Kwadwo Asante  [ Ag. Head Compliance ]
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202118
Ms. Jessie Jacintho [ General Counsel ]
Kojo is currently the Head, Human Resources Department of GCB Bank
Plc. He started his banking career as a Management Trainee on 1stApril, 1993.
Prior to his appointment, Mr. Essel was the Registrar of GCB Registrars. He
had worked in responsible positions in the area of Consumer Banking,Credit/Risk, Human Resources, Treasury (Money Market environment aswell as Brokerage) and Registrar Service in the Capital Market environment,among others.
He has Master of Business Administration (MBA) from Henley Business
School, UK and holds a B.Sc. (Hons) degree in Mathematics/Statistics fromthe Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST). He isalso a member of the Institute of Human Resource ManagementPractitioners (IHRMP).Jessie was appointed General Counsel on 15th February 2016 and is responsible for leading 
the legal function of the Bank. 
Jessie has an Executive Masters Degree in Business Administration, Human Resource Option 
from the University of Ghana Business School and has close to 25 years’ experience as a legal practitioner. Jessie has over twenty years’ experience as an in-house counsel having worked with Barclays Bank of Ghana now Absa Bank Ghana for fourteen years, sixteen months with The First Group Limited an investment and management company as its General Counsel and Corporate A/uniFB00airs Director. 
During the same period double hatted as the acting Legal Director of Universal Merchant 
Bank an investee company of The First Group. The remaining period of her in-house counsel role is her current role in GCB. Prior to starting her career as an in-house counsel she worked as a private legal practitioner with the law ﬁrm Naoferg Chambers.
Mr. Ishaque Kojo Essel Jnr.  [ Head, Human Resources ]
Executive Committee (EXCO) (Continued)
Mr. Sina Kamagate [ Chief Internal Auditor ]
Sina Joined GCB Bank in 2020 with over 13 years of demonstrable experience in signiﬁcant areas in banking. His experiences cut across Finance, Treasury, Trade ﬁnance, External Audit and Assurance Service, Internal Audit, Internal Control amongst others.
His work life started with GCB Bank as an Intern and subsequently as National
Service Person, he moved to International Commercial Bank (now FBN Ghana) and left after two (2) years to Ernst & Young Chartered Accountants where he worked in the ﬁnancial services team. He left in 2013 to join Fidelity Bank and was instrumental in the implementation of a risk based approach for the internal audit function. He left in 2014 to UMB Bank to set up the Internal Control Department which has grown to be a key department in the bank.
In 2018 Sina re-joined Fidelity as he went up the corporate ladder and was 
appointed as the Head of Audit in charge of Head O/uniFB03ce until April 2020.
He is a Chartered Accountant (ICA), A Chartered Banker (CIB) and holds distinction 
in ACI (Operations). He also holds Master of Research in Finance and a ﬁrst class Accounting Graduate of University of Ghana Business School.
He is a subject matter expert in Finance of International Trade, IFRS, Treasury 
Management, Internal Control, Auditing and Risk Management. He is a Faculty Member at the National Banking College in the Risk, Regulation and Banking Operations departments.
He is a lecturer at the Chartered Institute of Bankers on part time basis in Finance 
of International trade. He also lectures in Risk Management, Corporate Governance and Treasury Management.
He is a Council Member (Governing Board) of the Chartered Institute of Bankers
 and chairs the Finance Committee.
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202119
Executive Committee (EXCO) (Continued)Mr. Anthony Koﬁ Asare [ Treasurer ]
Martin is the Acting Head, Compliance Department of the Bank. He holds an M.A. in 
Industrial Management from the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and 
Technology (KNUST) and has Bachelor of Arts degree in Economics from the 
University of Ghana, Legon. 
Martin is a Certiﬁed Compliance Specialist and member of the Association of Certiﬁed 
Compliance Professionals in Africa. He has attended several GIABA, Bank of Ghana and Financial Intelligence Centre sponsored programmes at both local and international levels in Compliance, Anti-Money Laundering, Financial Crime, Risk Management among others.
He joined the Bank as Management Trainee in 1991 and rose to become Branch 
Manager in 1997. He has since played various supervisory and managerial roles at Consumer Banking, Risk Management, Internal Audit and Compliance departments. Currently, Martin doubles as the Anti-Money Laundering Reporting O/uniFB03cer (AMLRO) of the Bank.  Koﬁ is a qualiﬁed Lawyer from the Ghana Law School, Accra, and he hasMBA in Finance from the University of Ghana Business School and aBachelor of Arts in Economics from the University of Ghana, Legon.
He is a Member of the Ghana Bar Association, and also ACI Certiﬁed in
both Dealing and Operations.
Koﬁ joined GCB in November, 1991 at the Planning and Research Division
of the Bank and rose to become the Head of the Division. He has heldvarious positions including the Chief Dealer of the Bank. In October, 1999he was transferred to the Treasury Department and rose to become theHead of Treasury Department in August, 2008 to present.
Mr. Martin Kwadwo Asante  [ Ag. Head Compliance ]
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202120
Executive Committee (EXCO) (Continued)
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202121
Five Year Financial Summary 
All figures are in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017
Income Statement
Interest income  2,379,370  1,938,908  1,555,646  1,355,151  1,187,853 
Interest expense  (484,527)  (430,210)  (387,194)  (388,048)  (292,542)
Net interest income 1,894,843 1,508,698 1,168,452  967,103  895,311 
Fee and commission income  410,277  329,702  293,127  249,025  207,787 
Fee and commission expense  (50,749)  (51,722)  (51,622)  (51,429)  (37,491)
Net fee and commission income  359,528  277,980  241,505  197,596  170,296 
Net trading income  157,540  166,628  141,745  90,638  41,020 
Other operating income  15,582  14,374  21,167  26,242  20,435 
Operating income  2,427,493  1,967,680  1,572,869  1,281,579  1,127,062 
Loss on derecognition of renegotiated loans  -    -    -    -    (1,543)
Net impairment loss on financial assets  (324,800)  (219,647)  (75,521)  (60,011)  (49,904)
Operating expenses  (1,263,747)  (1,129,641)  (924,583)  (776,650)  (756,938)
Operating profit  838,946  618,392  572,765  444,918  318,677 
Share of profit of associates, net of tax  (6,972)  (7,566)  903  5,256  13,306 
Profit before income tax  831,974  610,826  573,668  450,174  331,983 
Income tax expense  (188,836)  (135,096)  (116,978)  (101,112)  (81,940)
National fiscal stabilization levy  (40,490)  (30,341)  (28,233)  (22,321)  (15,445)
Financial sector recovery levy  (30,368)  -    -    -    -   
Profit for the year   572,280  445,389  428,457  326,741  234,598 
Other Comprehensive Income:Items that will not be reclassified to profit or lossRemeasurements on net defined benefit liability/asset  4,540  14,192  (16,528)  26,257  (19,898)
Fair value of equity instruments  284  (4,113)  (27,944)  -    -   
income tax relating to items that will not be reclassified  629  3,977  5,288  (6,564)  4,975 
Total items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss  5,453  14,056  (39,184)  19,693  (14,923)
Items that may be reclassified to profit or loss
Exchange differences on translating foreign operations  (8,836)  (1,211)  18,524  (3,903)  -   
Fair value changes on financial assets at fair value
through other comprehensive income
Share of comprehensive income of associates  -    -    -    (14,792)  -   
Net gain on equity investments  (4,314)  401  2,321  (2,050)  2,483 
Income tax relating to items that may be reclassified  14,139  -    -    -    -   
Fair value changes on available for sale financial assets  -    -    -    4,010  (195)
Foreign currency translation difference for foreign operation  -    -    -    -    783 
Total items that may be reclassified to profit or loss  989  (810)  20,845  (16,735)  35,357 
Other comprehensive income, net of taxation  6,442  13,246  (18,339)  2,958  20,434 
Total comprehensive income for the year 578,722 458,635 410,118 329,699 255,032 
Basic and diluted earnings per share (in GH¢) 2.16 1.68 1.62  1.23  0.89 Statements of Comprehensive Income - GroupGCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202122
 
All figures are in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents  2,301,092  1,567,241  1,572,538  1,953,620  1,022,684 
Non-pledged trading Assets  477,658  221,339  142,790  80,004  10,079 
Derivative financial instruments  -    -    236  -    -   
Investment (other than securities)  26,366  18,534  35,439  41,275  6,902 
Loans and advances to customers  4,306,380  3,612,588  3,587,653  2,799,041  2,099,330 
Advances to banks  201,030  200,904  209,614  212,986  224,950 
Investment securities  9,765,840  8,622,846  6,025,382  4,646,034  4,884,277 
Investment in associates  82,280  91,681  100,391  81,482  88,460 
Deferred tax asset  238,171  158,465  95,324  47,872  32,095 
Current tax asset  -    25,808  -    1,067  578 
Intangible assets  168,226  191,136  201,820  190,901  152,349 
Other assets  536,552  462,701  280,555  429,396  882,496 
Property, equipment and right-of-use-assets  301,332  280,654  272,342  237,247  222,861 
Total assets 18,404,927  15,453,897 12,524,084 10,720,925  9,627,061 
Liabilities
Deposits from banks & other financial 
institutions 747,589  615,418  501,911  272,769  81,805 
Deposits from customers  13,154,527  11,345,240  9,320,878  8,024,425  6,842,236 
Borrowings  988,073  772,525  457,578  344,884  959,105 
Current tax liabilities  56,247  -    9,017  -    -   
Employee benefit obligations  113,464  113,322  118,664  97,647  118,625 
Other liabilities  646,556  421,394  335,674  531,456  411,131 
Total liabilities 15,706,456  13,267,899  10,743,722  9,271,181 8,412,902 
Equity
Stated capital  500,000  500,000  500,000  500,000  100,000 
Retained earnings  1,547,835  1,111,387  828,873  585,167  870,198 
Statutory reserve  639,555  569,971  460,096  354,845  274,062 
Regulatory credit risk reserve  -    -    -    -    -   
Fair value reserve  14,997  5,395  1,581  26,048  2,005 
Other reserves  (3,916)  (755)  (10,188)  (16,316)  (32,106)
Total shareholders' equity  2,698,471  2,185,998  1,780,362 1,449,744  1,214,159 
Total liabilities and  shareholders' equity 18,404,927  15,453,897 12,524,084 10,720,925  9,627,061 Statements of Financial Position - Group  GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202123
Financial Highlights - Group
27%
22%25%
ROEROE 
&
ROA
4%
3% 3%
ROABasic 
Earnin gs 
Per ShareTotal 
Assets
(Ghs’m)
Revenue 
By 
Segme nt
(Ghs’m)975 
372 837 208 
 Retail Banking Dec-19  Dec-20  Dec-21  Corporate  Treasury  Commercial Banking
Dec-19 Dec-20 Dec- 21162 168 216 
Dec-19 Dec-20 Dec- 2112,524  15,454 18,405  
Dec-19 Dec-20 Dec- 211,573 1,968  2,427 
Ope rating
Income
(Ghs’m)
Dec-19 Dec-20 Dec- 21574 611 839 
Proﬁt 
Before Tax
(Ghs’m)
Dec-19 Dec-20 Dec- 219,823 11,961 13,902 
Custome r 
Deposits
(Ghs’m)
Dec-19 Dec-20 Dec- 213,588 3,613 4,306 
Loans and
Advances
(Ghs’m)
Capital 
Adequacy 
Ratio
20.9% 20.5%20.9%
Dec-19 Dec-20 Dec-21Cost to 
Income 
Ratio
58.8%
57.6%
52.6%
Dec-19 Dec-20 Dec-21GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202124
Chairman’s Statement
Introduction
On behalf of the Board of Directors, it is my pleasure 
and honor once again to welcome you our shareholders to our Annual General Meeting. 
There is no doubt that 2021 was another difficult year 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic which disrupted supply chains globally and reduced trade flows.  Despite these challenges your Bank continued in its relentless pursuit of improving shareholder returns through the 
efficient delivery of convenient and accessible financial 
products and solutions to our cherished customers. 
GCB Bank ended the year with record profitability, a 
demonstration of the confidence and trust reposed in your Bank.  We remain resolute in our ambition to dominate the market in Ghana through the implementation of our strategy anchored on the three 
pillars of revenue growth and profitability, operational 
excellence and people and talent. 
Our strong performance in 2021 would not have been 
possible without the measures implemented by the Government of Ghana to combat COVID-19 as well as 
the professional handling of the pandemic by the 
health authorities. The people of Ghana also need recognition for their observance of the COVID-19 protocols.Global Economic Environment
The global economy recovered in 2021 and global growth improved to 6.1 percent in 2021 from -3.1 percent in 2020. This was largely on the back of a 
recovery in the two largest economies in the world, 
USA and China. USA witnessed a growth of 5.7 percent from -3.4 percent in 2020 whilst China also saw a growth of 8.1 percent from 2.3 percent in 2020. Countries rolled out mass COVID-19 vaccination programs to contain the adverse effect of the 
pandemic and save lives.
In 2022, global growth is expected to moderate to 3.6 
percent mainly due to economic challenges arising from the conflict between Russia and Ukraine. Furthermore, rising energy prices and supply disruptions have resulted in higher and broad-based 
inflation than anticipated, notably in the United States 
and many emerging markets and developing economies. Also, the challenges in China’s real estate sector and lockdowns in key manufacturing and trade 
hubs in China and its impact on supply disruption 
elsewhere would impact negatively on the global economy in 2022.
Ghanaian Economy & Operating Environment
The developments in the global economy had a knock-on effect on the Ghanaian economy. Ghana’s Gross 
Mr. Jude Kofi Arthur
Board Chairman“We remain resolute in our 
ambition to dominate the 
market in Ghana through the 
implementation of our strategy anchored on the three pillars of revenue growth and 
profitability, operational 
excellence and people and talent.”GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 25
Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate was 5.4 percent 
compared to 0.5 percent in 2020. The upturn in growth resulted from information and communication, 
real estate, transport and storage and a rebound in 
import trade, cocoa, hotels and restaurant sectors of the economy.
Headline inflation trended upwards from 10.4 percent 
in December 2020 to 12.6 percent in December 2021 
driven mainly by sustained increased in food prices. Interest rates on the money market broadly showed downward trends across the yield curve. The 91-day Treasury bill rate declined to 12.5 percent in December 
2021 from 14.1 percent in 2020, and the 182-day 
Treasury bill rate fell to 13.2 percent in 2021 from 14.1 percent in 2020. The weighted average interbank rate declined to 12.7 percent from 13.6 percent, largely reflecting improved liquidity conditions. The monetary policy rate inched up by 100 basis points(bps) to 14.5 
percent from 13.5 percent in November 2021 with the 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) citing elevated inflationary risk. 
The Ghana Cedi depreciated by 4.1 percent and 3.1 
percent against the US Dollar and Pound respectively in 2021, compared with 3.9 percent and 7.1 percent 
depreciation in 2020. The Cedi however, appreciated 
by 3.5 percent against the Euro compared to a depreciation rate of 12.1 percent in 2020. The strong reserve position of the Country provided some buffers for the local currency despite demand pressures in 2021.
Overall the performance of the banking sector in 2021 
was encouraging with sustained growth in assets and 
deposits alongside improvements in the financial soundness indicators. The industry remained solvent with an average industry Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) of 20.9 percent well above the 11.5 percent 
regulatory minimum threshold.
A Resilient Financial Performance
Despite the global and domestic economic challenges 
due to the pandemic, the financial performance of your Bank was strong. We achieved Profit before Tax 
of GHS 831.98 million an increase of 36.2% over the 
prior year. Profit after Tax grew 28.5% to GHS 572.28 million after adjusting for a 5% Levy applied on the Profit before Tax of the bank following the enactment of the Financial Sector Recovery Act, 2021, Act 1067. Total assets increased 19.1% to GHS 
18.40 billion. Customer deposits grew 16.2% to GHS 
13.90 billion and Total equity increased 23.4% to 2.70 billion.
The strong financial performance was underpinned by 
strong internal collaboration among business units and support functions which contributed to growth in revenue and efficiency in our operations. We continued to intensify control of costs and this helped achieve improvement in our cost income ratio. Further, we augmented the leadership team in key areas and our 
talent and leadership plan is on course to ensure we 
build and retain talent to support sustainable performance going forward. Improvement in staff  performance management system and employee engagement contributed significantly to our resilient and strong performance for the year.  In line with our 
strategy we will continue to invest in technology and 
pursue our digital roadmap to enable us provide superior service to our customers. 
Dividend 
The Bank recorded significant growth in profitability and our capital adequacy is strong, well over the regulatory minimum prescribed by the Bank of Ghana. 
On the basis of this the Board recommends a dividend 
of GHS 0.50 per share representing a 100 percent increase compared to 2020, subject to Bank of Ghana’s approval. This reflects the Board’s ongoing confidence 
in the Bank’s strengths and its future prospects. Our 
strong and resilient balance sheet, diversified business mix and improving profitability give us the financial strength to continue to make the right investments while also rewarding our shareholders with a steady and increasing flow of dividends. 
A rebound in the stock market in 2021 resulted in an 
improved performance of the Financial Stock Index 
with a year to date performance of 20.7 percent compared to -11.7 percent in 2020. At the beginning of the year GCB Bank’s share price was GHS 4.05, increasing to GHS 5.40 by mid-year before closing the 
year at GHS 5.24, indicating a year to date growth of 
29.4 percent and in line with market trends. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, we remain focused in our 
quest to continuously deliver value to you, our shareholders. We can confidently say that the Bank is 
on the right path to become the dominant Bank in 
Ghana.
Progress on Our Digital Journey
The future of banking and other businesses in general continue to be underpinned by digital transformation. Institutions that have not prioritized digital first are 
going to encounter difficulties in remaining competitive 
in the market. Therefore, accelerating digital capabilities as a key driver to dominate the industry and create shareholder value is imperative. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, in pursuit of our digital 
roadmap to create value and a distinct customer GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202126
experience, your Bank appointed a Chief Digital and 
Marketing Officer who will lead all digitization activities across the bank. We have also resourced teams 
internally to review and optimize internal processes 
and established a data management unit to support the development of relevant and innovative solutions as well as enhance the quality of information to support improved decision making. 
We launched our Security Operations Center (SOC) 
demonstrating our commitment to protecting our business and clients and enable us respond effectively to cyber and information security threats and 
incidents.  Furthermore, the Bank completed the 
upgrade of the Core Banking Software Flexcube from version 12.0 to 14.3. The upgrade has contributed significantly to improving the performance of our core application and provided us with enhanced flexibility to offer new and innovative solutions to you our cherished clients. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, we will continue to accelerate 
our digital agenda by making the right investments to derive maximum value for the benefit of our customers and stakeholders. 
Leadership & Talent Development 
We recognize that our quest to dominate the market requires a robust framework for a leadership pipeline in the Bank which guarantees an adequate flow of 
talent to fill senior roles as part of our succession 
management. 
The Board remains committed to the development of 
talent within the bank so as to build a steady, strong and reliable pipeline to take up leadership positions in 
the Bank. Our focus is to identify high potential leaders 
and implement tailor-made training and development to enhance capacity in the organization. 
Board of Directors
During the year under review, two of our members Mr. Nik Amarteifio and Mr. Prince Edward Amoatia Younge retired from the Board. We thank them for their 
valuable contributions to the Board and the Bank. On 
behalf of the Board, I wish them success in their future endeavors.It is my honour to welcome Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asirifi and Honorable Dr. Stephen Amoah to our Board as Non-Executive Directors. I also welcome Mr. Samuel Kwame Yedu Aidoo to the Board of GCB Bank as Executive Director, Wholesale and Investment Banking. Mr. Aidoo is responsible for the 
Corporate Banking, Global Markets (Treasury) business 
units and will also oversee GCB Capital, our investment banking business. The three newly appointed directors bring valuable skills, expertise and experience as well as significant understanding of the financial services 
industry, and an in-depth understanding of the 
regulatory landscape. The Bank has received regulatory clearance from Bank of Ghana for the new appointees. The appointment of the new directors will be presented to shareholders at today’s meeting for approval in line with corporate governance standards.
Conclusion
Ladies and Gentlemen, we are confident that the execution of our strategy and business priorities will ensure that we deliver sustainable returns to our 
shareholders. Our strong financial results in 2021 
would not have been possible without the support of our cherished customers and the hard work of executive management and dedication of our employees.  I salute you for your loyalty to the Bank. I would also like to recognize my colleague directors for 
the tireless response to duty in the service to the Bank 
and finally to say thank you to our shareholders who have supported us in this journey.
Thank you once again for the opportunity to be of 
service.
Jude Kofi Arthur
ChairmanChairman’s Statement (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202127
ADVERT
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202128
Managing Director’s Statement
Review of Operations for the 2021 financial year
Introduction
Dear shareholders, it is my pleasure to present to you 
my report on the performance of your Bank, GCB Bank Plc for the year ended 31st December 2021 which 
demonstrates our resilience as we make progress 
towards our ambition to dominate the market amidst the challenging environment.
The COVID-19 pandemic which emerged as a socio-
economic and humanitarian crisis worldwide infected 
millions and slowed down global economic activities 
as countries imposed tight restrictions on physical movement to flatten the spread of the virus. As health concerns and mortality grew, substantial economic deterioration was clear and resulted in a record contraction in global economic growth. The imposition of border restrictions led to supply chain disruptions, 
adversely impacting global trade flow and resulted in 
lower demand for non-essential goods and services.
Your Bank’s response to these unprecedented 
challenges has been notable and we are exceedingly proud of how we supported our employees, customers 
and communities by keeping all business lines and 
branches opened throughout the year.
The financial industry was significantly impacted by 
the pass-through effects of the virus on our operations. The extraordinary resilience portrayed by management and staff in the face of daunting challenges made it possible for the bank to achieve strong financial performance for the year.
Global Economic Environment
I would like to highlight some of the key global events that shaped the year under review.
Global price pressures intensified in 2021, primarily 
due to a sharp increase in energy prices, rising demand 
pressures and persistent supply chain disruptions. As a result, headline inflation across several Advanced and Emerging Market economies rose above targets. These trends have triggered reversals of the 
accommodative policies put in place to stimulate 
recovery from the pandemic. In the United States, the Federal Reserve Bank has continued with the tapering of its asset purchase programme and signaled its intention to bring forward planned rate hikes in 2022 to address rising underlying inflationary pressures. 
Similarly, policymakers in several emerging market 
economies continue to stay on the path of policy tightening on the monetary and fiscal fronts to manage rising inflation, drop in revenues and exchange rate hikes. The expectation of higher policy rates by major 
central banks has driven up long-term bond yields. 
Spreads on sovereign bonds have widened, especially for Emerging Markets (EMs) and frontier economies 
Mr. Kofi Adomakoh
Managing Director“Accelerating our digital 
transformation remain a key focus 
area for your bank so as to offer 
innovative solutions to our 
customers, improve our operations 
and employee experience. We will 
continue to leverage partnerships to 
create and deliver superior solutions and services for the benefit of our 
customers.”GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 29
with weak fundamentals. Additionally, capital flows to 
EMs and developing economies have become volatile due to expectations about higher US interest rates 
and a strengthening of the US dollar.
Ghanaian Economy and Operating Environment
Domestically, the economy continued its steady 
recovery from the COVID-19 related economic downturn. The latest Ghana Statistical Service update 
showed that overall, GDP growth for 2021 was 5.4% 
exceeding the projected target of 4.4 percent.
After falling to 7.5 percent in May 2021, inflation 
increased throughout the second half of the year, 
ending December 2021 at 12.6 percent. Non-food 
inflation went up from 9.2 percent in May 2021 to 12.5 percent in December 2021 while food inflation, over the same period, rose sharply, moving from 5.4 percent in May 2021 to 12.8 percent in December 2021. 
The upward trajectory of inflation in the second half of 
2021 reflected food supply challenges, rising crude oil 
prices and some pass-through effects of exchange 
rate depreciation in the last quarter.
Gross International Reserves as of December 2021 
stood at US$9.7 billion (equivalent to 4.4 months of import cover). This compares with a reserve position 
of US$8.6 billion (4.0 months of import cover) at the 
end of 2020. The strong reserve position provided some buffers for the local currency in 2021. Cumulatively, while the Ghana Cedi depreciated by 4.1 percent and 3.1 percent against the US Dollar and 
Pound Sterling, respectively in 2021, it appreciated by 
3.5 percent against the Euro. In the same period of 2020, the Ghana Cedi recorded a depreciation of 3.9 percent, 7.1 percent, and 12.1 percent against the US Dollar, the Pound Sterling and the Euro, respectively.
On the money market, the 91-day and 182-day Treasury 
bill rates declined to 12.49 percent and 13.19 percent in December 2021, from 14.08 percent and 14.13 percent respectively in December 2020. The weighted average interbank rate declined to 12.68 percent from 13.56 percent. The average lending rates of banks declined marginally to 20.04 percent in December 2021 from 
21.20 percent recorded in the corresponding period of 
2020.
Banking Industry Performance Highlights
The banking sector remained sound and well-capitalized with strong growth in total assets and deposits throughout the year 2021 despite the effects 
of the challenges posed by COVID-19.
Total assets of the banking industry increased by 20.4 
percent (year-on-year) to GH¢179.8 billion as of December 2021, higher than the 15.8 percent growth recorded in the same period of 2020 due to strong investment growth. Growth in gross loans and advances continued to pick up despite the pandemic -
induced sluggish credit demand and supply conditions. 
Gross loans and advances recorded a year-on-year increase of 12.6 percent to GH¢53.8 billion as of December 2021, higher than the 5.8 percent growth recorded in the previous year.
Growth in industry deposits was sustained with a 
year-on-year growth of 16.6 percent to GH¢121.1 billion. This was lower than the 24.4 percent growth recorded in 2020. Total borrowings increased by 51.9 percent in 
2021 compared with a contraction of 29.0 percent in 
2020. The industry’s shareholders’ funds remained strong, indicative of a strong capital base within the banking sector to withstand shocks. Shareholders’ funds grew by 16.8 percent to GH¢24.8 billion as of 
December 2021 compared to the 20.8 percent growth 
in December 2020.
The profitability performance of the sector remained 
robust in 2021 despite the dip in the growth rate of profits. Profit before Tax recorded a 22.1 percent growth in 2021, relative to the 27.2 percent attained in the previous year. Industry total revenue increased by 
14.6% to GHS 17.43 billion in 2021. Net interest income 
grew by 14.5 percent in 2021 compared to a growth of 20.9 percent in 2020. The strong growth in contingent liabilities and trade finance activities supported the growth in net fees and commissions by 24.8 percent 
in 2021, higher than the increase of 5.0 percent in 
2020. Growth in operating expenses was higher at 14.2 percent in 2021 relative to the 8.2 percent growth a year earlier, driven by growth in staff costs and other operating expenses. Total provisions, however, contracted by 4.7 percent as of December 2021 from 
the 28.0 percent growth recorded a year ago.
Our 2021 Financial Performance Highlights
2021 was another strong year for your Bank. Despite 
the global and domestic economic challenges due to the pandemic, your Bank’s revenue increased to 
GHS2,427.49 million, 23.4 percent increase over that 
of 2020.
GCB Bank recorded growth in Profit before Tax of GHS 
831.98 million from GHS610.83 million in 2020, up by 36.2 percent. This is a reflection of our consistent implementation of a diversified business model, our focus on growing revenue and managing risks even in 
the face of increased competition. Net interest income 
was up by 25.6 percent, from GHS 1,508.70 million to GHS 1,894.84 million. Net fees and commission income also increased by 29.3 percent to GHS 359.53 million from GHS 277.98 million. Cost 
containment measures resulted in a growth of 11.9 GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202130
Managing Director’s Statement (Continued)
percent in operating expenses compared to 26.2 
percent in the prior year from GHS 1,129.64 million to GHS 1,263.75 million. The cost to income ratio 
improved from 58.0 percent in 2020 to 52.2 percent 
in 2021.
1,168 1,509 1,895 163 181 173 
242 278 360 
2019 2020 2021Operating Income
(GHS' M)
Net Interest Income Net Trading & Other Income Net Fees/Commission
The Bank closed the year with total assets of GHS 
18.40 billion, representing year-on-year growth of 19.1 percent, driven mainly by 19.2 percent and 13.3 percent 
increase in loans and advances to customers and 
investment in securities respectively.
Customer deposits which remain a key balance sheet 
component grew by 16.2 percent from 11.96 billion in 2020 to GHS 13.90 billion in 2021. We are grateful for the business of our cherished customers. They continue to show faith in us by continually entrusting 
us with their deposits. The Bank’s equity recorded a 
growth of 23.3 percent from GHS 2.19 billion in 2020 to GHS 2.70 billion in 2021.       
9,823 11,960 13,913 
2019 2020 2021Deposits (GHS 'M)
3,588 3,613 4,306 
2019 2020 2021Net Loans and Advances 
(GHS 'M)
The Capital Adequacy Ratio of your bank stood at 20.9 percent, significantly above the prudential requirement of 11.5 percent. This is an indication that your Bank is 
sufficiently capitalized for our business mix, size and 
risk profile. Earnings per share increased by 28.6 percent from GHS 1.68 to GHS 2.16.
Ladies and Gentlemen, we remain relentless in our 
quest to continuously deliver value to you, our 
shareholders. With our strategic thrust of revenue growth, operational excellence, investment in our people and harnessing the current and emerging technologies to our advantage, your Bank is on the 
right path to realise its ambition to dominate the 
banking sector in Ghana.Regulatory Developments
Ladies and Gentlemen, the benefits of the Central Bank’s financial sector clean-up activities continued to yield positive results enabling a resilient banking 
industry which helped to withstand the adverse 
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The latest stress tests conducted on the banking sector by the Bank of Ghana (BOG) showed that banks remained resilient under mild to moderate stress conditions supported by the strong capital and liquidity buffers and the 
regulatory reliefs introduced during the pandemic.
To further enhance the performance and effectiveness 
of the banking sector we have highlighted below some 
regulatory and policy interventions as well as some 
other developments in 2021. Some of these directives include the following:
• Introduction of a new liquidity assistance framework.  BoG in February 2021 implemented a 
new liquidity assistance framework. Key features of 
the framework are the provision of Intraday 
Liquidity Facility (ILF) and Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA).
• Revision of Mergers and Acquisitions Directive.  
The key revision is a 3-stage approach to the application procedure, with two (2) inherent 
approval stages.
• Hiking the Monetary Policy Rate (MPR)  by 100 
basis points to 14.5 percent from 13.5 percent.
• BoG Sandbox Pilot.  In February 2021, BoG, in 
conjunction with EMTECH Service LLC, launched a 
regulatory and innovation sandbox test. This is to 
help create a regulatory framework that is both 
enabling and inclusive, promoting FinTechs and supporting innovation.
• Ghana’s first Digital Currency  was announced by 
BoG and in partnership with Giesecke+Devrient (G+D) is piloting a general-purpose Central Bank 
Digital Currency (CBDC), the e-Cedi.
• Money Laundering list.  The exclusion of the 
Country from the Financial Action Task Force’s 
(FATF) “grey list,” supported by the enactment of 
legislation to combat money laundering.
• The Risk Management Directive  was announced 
in November 2021. The Directive requires Regulated 
Financial Institutions to have systems for identifying, 
measuring, evaluating, controlling, mitigating and 
reporting material risks that may affect their ability GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 31
to meet their obligations to depositors and other 
stakeholders.
• Guidelines for Domestic Processing of Payment Card Transactions  with payment cards issued in 
Ghana in July 2021. This guideline seeks to promote 
the domestic processing of payment card 
transactions to curb the high cost associated with the offshore processing to increase its availability and use
• Unclaimed Balances and Dormant Accounts Directive  was issued in February 2021 to establish 
processes and procedures for reclaim of funds by 
dormant account holders or their legal 
representatives. The guidelines also ensure funds of customers of regulated financial institutions that become dormant are adequately protected;
• Policy brief on Dud Cheques  issued in October 
2021. The brief detailed new applicable sanctions 
on offenders in addition to the criminality of the 
offence of issuance of dud cheques under section 313(A) of the Criminal Offences Act, 1960 (Act 29). 
Your bank remains committed to complying with all the regulatory directives and guidelines applicable to our operations.
Our Digital Transformation
Accelerating our digital transformation remain a key focus area for your bank so as to offer innovative solutions to our customers, improve our operations 
and employee experience. We will continue to leverage 
partnerships to create and deliver superior solutions and services for the benefit of our customers.
Ladies and Gentlemen, in pursuit of digitalization as a 
key strategic agenda of the Board, your Bank has set up a data management team to mine customer data to give us a unique advantage of analyzing and mapping 
our customers’ journeys to better understand their 
needs. This in essence will ensure that we provide value to our customers by delivering tailored products and services. The Security Operations Center (SOC), a 
part of the cyber and information security unit was set 
up to monitor all the banks’ information assets and to provide detection and response capabilities against cybersecurity threats and incidents. Since its inception, the unit has led the ISO 27001 certification for the 
Bank as well as the successful renewal of our payment 
card industry data security standard (PCI-DSS) certification.
Furthermore, the Bank completed the upgrade of the 
Core Banking Software, FlexCube, from version 12.0  
to 14.3. Based on the upgrade, your Bank has seen a 
remarkable improvement in the performance of our systems and in providing better services to our customers.
Additionally, to enhance the convenience of service 
delivery for our customers, the following digital products and services were upgraded in 2021:
• Upgraded the GCB Mobile App with extensive customer focus features.
• Expanded the International cards product bouquet with the introduction of Gold and Platinum cards for MasterCard and Visa.
• Introduced Contactless Cards and Contactless enabled Point of Sale (PoS) terminals.
• Mobile Money Access on the Bank’s Internet Banking Platform.
• Mobile Banking platform (USSD) and Internet Banking upgrade to enable bank to wallet and wallet to bank transactions.
• Enabled G-Money termination on ATMs.
As part of our digital transformation journey, we will continue to leverage partnerships to create and deliver superior solutions and services for the benefit of our 
customers.
Our Strategic Focus – The Way Forward
Ladies and Gentlemen, given our heritage and legacy 
in Ghana, we have acquired deep knowledge of the market. In order to improve and better serve our 
clients and effectively position our business for 
sustainable value creation to you, our shareholders, we refreshed our strategy during the year. Our strategy emphasizes our renewed focus on revenue growth and profitability; operational resilience; and people and talent development. Our ambition is to become 
the dominant Bank in our chosen markets. The 
macroeconomic fundamentals and the business environment provide further opportunities for revenue generation. We will continue to expand our efforts to grow our non-funded income, manage our operating expenses, as well as strengthen risk management and internal control. We will also continue to invest in 
technology and our people so as to ensure that we 
have the right talent at all times to support the achievement of the banks goals, improve effectiveness and efficiency of our operations and deliver superior value to our customers.
I can assure you our esteem shareholders that we 
remain on course to realising our ambition to dominate the market.
While we acknowledge the global and local economic 
challenges resulting from the raging COVID-19 
pandemic, we remain confident in our ability to GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202132
continue to rise to the occasion and achieve an even 
stronger competitive position in 2022 and beyond.
Corporate Social Responsibility  
As a Bank, we have always been alive to the social responsibilities of the communities we operate in. In response to our duty of serving humanity, we took 
extensive actions to support our communities and 
underserved population focusing on health, education, sports, financial inclusion and the environment.
During the year, we invested GHS 1.79 million in the 
COVID-19 National Trust Fund, Climate Change and 
Sustainable Development Goals Program, Development of Women Football in Ghana among a host of other programs as part of our corporate social responsibility.
Appreciation
I would like to thank the Board of Directors for their guidance, our shareholders for your continued support over the years. We remain focused in our drive to continue returning exceptional value to you.
I would also like to acknowledge the management 
team and staff for their hard work and diligence that contributed to this stellar performance for 2021. Their contribution and commitment year after year to ensure the continued growth and profitability of our Bank is highly commendable and appreciated.
To our loyal customers, we thank you for the privilege 
of doing business with you in the past year. 
I am confident that we are well prepared to address 
the challenges and take advantage of the opportunities in 2022 with the view to build a sustainable business that provides value to our customers, shareholders, employees and all other stakeholders.
I would like to assure you that your Bank has put in 
place appropriate plans and will effectively execute 
them so as to realize our ambition to dominate the market.
Thank you for allowing us to be of service to you.
Kofi Adomakoh.Managing DirectorManaging Director’s Statement (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 33
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202134
ADVERT
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202135
ADVERT
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202136
The Directors are pleased to submit their report on the consolidated and separate financial statements of GCB 
Bank Plc for the year ended 31 December 2021.
Directors’ Responsibility Statement
The Directors are responsible for the preparation of the consolidated and separate financial statements that give a true and fair view of GCB Bank Plc, comprising the statements of financial position as at 31 December 2021, statements of profit or loss and comprehensive income, statements of changes in equity and statements of cash 
flows for the year ended and notes to the consolidated financial statements, which include a summary of 
significant accounting policies and other explanatory notes, in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised DepositTaking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930). In addition, the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the Report of the Directors.
The Directors are also responsible for such internal controls as they determine are necessary to enable the 
preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and for maintaining adequate accounting records and an effective system of risk management.
The Directors have made an assessment of the ability of the Bank and its subsidiary to continue as going 
concerns and have no reason to believe that the businesses will not be going concerns in the year ahead. 
The Auditor is responsible for reporting on whether the consolidated and separate financial statements give a 
true and fair view in accordance with the applicable financial reporting framework.
Principal Activities
The Bank has a universal banking license and is registered to carry on the business of retail banking, commercial banking, corporate banking and treasury activities. It also engages in investment banking activities through its subsidiary. The nature of the Group’s business did not change during the year.
Shareholding Structure
Details of the Bank’s twenty largest shareholders are disclosed in Note 42a of the Annual Report.
The Bank’s shareholding structure at the end of the year was as follows:
Shareholder Percentage Holding
Social Security and National Insurance Trust (SSNIT) 29.89%
The Government of Ghana 21.36%
Institutions and Individuals 48.75%
Total 100.00%
Subsidiary and Associates
GCB Capital Limited, a company incorporated in Ghana to engage in investment banking activities, is a wholly 
owned subsidiary of the Bank.
The Bank holds 20% interest in Ghana International Bank Plc, a company incorporated in the United Kingdom 
to provide universal banking services.
The Bank holds indirect interest of 20%, 25% and 34% in Ghana Textiles Manufacturing Company, Accra 
Markets Limited and NCR Ghana Limited respectively through its subsidiary.
Ghana Textiles Manufacturing Company is a company engaged in the production and processing of textile as 
well as warehousing.
Accra Markets Limited is a company incorporated in Ghana whose principal business is the management of the Report of the Directors
to the members of GCB Bank PlcGCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 37
Kaneshie Market Complex. NCR Ghana Limited is a leading technology and omnichannel solutions company 
incorporated in Ghana.
Details of serving directors’ other engagements at the reporting date are disclosed below:
Directors Qualification Other Engagements and Positions
Mr. Jude Kofi 
ArthurFellow, The Chartered Institute of Bankers, Ghana
BSc. Administration, University of Ghana, LegonGhana International Bank - Non-
Executive Director
Mr. Kofi 
AdomakohExecutive MBA, University of Ghana, Legon
BSc. Agriculture, University of Ghana, LegonGCB Capital Limited - Non-Executive 
Director
Mr. Socrates 
AframFellow, Association of Chartered Certified Accountants-UK
MBA Finance, University of Ghana, LegonBachelor of Commerce, University of Cape Coast.GCB Capital Limited - Non-Executive 
Director
NCR Ghana Limited - Non-Executive 
Director
Mr. Emmanuel Odartey LampteyFellow, Association of Chartered Certified Accountants-UK
Bachelor of Commerce, University of Cape CoastGCB Capital Limited -Non-Executive 
Director
Vivo Ghana Limited - Non-Executive 
Director
Mrs. Lydia Gyamera EssahMPhil- Institute of Management & Public Administration (GIMPA);
BA English & Literature, University of Ghana, LegonNone
Nana Ama 
Ayensua Saara IIIB. Com, University of Cape Coast
Diploma Business Studies, Takoradi PolytechnicNasaa Company Limited - Executive 
Director
Government Special Initiative - Non-
Executive Director
Mr. Francis Arthur-CollinsFellow, Ghana Institute of Information Technology
Member, Institute for the Management of Information 
Systems (UK)
Member, British Computer Society (UK)
Master’s Degree in Information Technology and 
Business Administration (MBA-IT), University of 
Leicester (UK)
Professional Certificate in Structured Systems 
Analysis and Design, National Centre for Information 
Technology, Manchester (UK)
Dp. Data Processing, University of Science & 
Technology, Kumasi (GH).None
Mr. Emmanuel 
Ray AnkrahFellow, Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA) UK
Fellow, British Society of Commerce 
Member, Institute of Chartered Accountants Ghana 
Post Graduate Diploma Strategic Financial 
Management, Kingston UniversityNational Insurance Commission - Non-Executive Director
Deputy CEO – Finance and 
Administration - COCOBODGCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202138
Directors Qualification Other Engagements and Positions
Mr. Osmani 
Aludiba AyubaMember, The Chartered Institute of Bankers, Ghana
Member, Institute of Chartered Accountants Ghana 
Member, Chartered Institute of Procurement and 
Supply 
M.A. Economic Policy Management, University of 
Ghana Legon
Bachelor of Commerce, University of Cape Coast Diploma in Education, University of Cape Coast.Northern Electricity Distribution 
Company (NEDCO)
Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan 
YakubuMBA Finance (part 1), University of Ghana, Legon
Certificate from the Financial Institution Analysis 
School of the Federal Reserve Bank, Washington DC
B.Sc. Administration, Banking & Finance, University of 
Ghana, LegonNone
Mr. Daniel Kwaku 
Tweneboah AsirifiGhana School of Law
Master in Public Administration (MPA), University of 
Ghana, Legon
B.Sc Administration, Public Administration, University 
of Ghana, LegonNone
Hon. Dr. Stephen AmoahPHD. in Actuarial Science – KNUST
Msc (Finance), University of Derby (UK)
Bsc. Computer Science- KNUSTZintex Portfolio – Executive Director
Mr. Nik Amarteifio
(resigned)MBA, Harvard Business SchoolBA. Economics, Wesleyan University
 
 Dannex Aryton Starwin 
Pharmaceutical Group Limited 
- Non-Executive Director
Omni Media (Citi FM) - Non-
Executive Director 
African American Inst. (NY) - Non-
Executive Director
Ghana Agro Food Company - Non-
Executive Director
Mr. Prince Edward 
Amoatia Younge
(resigned)M.Phil. (Marketing) – University of Ghana Legon
EMBA (Marketing) – University of Ghana Legon
BSc. Sociology with Economics- University of Ghana
Member, American Marketing AssociationTargetlink Limited - Executive 
Director
Cypher Consult Limited - Executive 
DirectorReport of the Directors to the members of GCB Bank Plc (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 39
Financial Results
The financial results of the Bank and Group for the year ended are set out in the financial statements, highlights 
of which are as follows:
2021 2020
 Bank Group Bank Group
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis       
Profit for the year (attributable to equity holders) 556,667 572,281 439,501 445,389
to which is added the balance brought forward on 
retained earnings of 1,013,504 1,111,387 736,878 828,873 
 1,570,171  1,683,668  1,176,379  1,274,262 
Out of which is transferred to the statutory reserve fund of (69,584) (69,584) (109,875) (109,875)
Dividend declared and paid of (66,250) (66,250) (53,000)
(53,000)
(135,834)  ((135,834) (162,875)  (162,875)
leaving a balance to be carried forward on 
retained earnings of 1,434,337  1,547,835  1,013,504  1,111,387  
In accordance with section 34 (1) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930), 
an amount of GHS 69,583,000 (2020: GHS 109,875,000) was transferred to the statutory reserve fund from retained earnings bringing the cumulative balance on the statutory reserve fund at the year-end to GHS 
639,555,000 (2020: GHS 569,971,000).
Related Party Transactions
The Board ensures that transactions with related parties including internal group transactions are reviewed to 
assess its risk and are subject to appropriate restrictions. 
Information regarding Directors’ interests in ordinary shares of the Bank and remuneration is disclosed in Note 
38 to the financial statements. Other than service contracts, no Director had a material interest in any contract 
to which any Group company was a party during the year. Related party transactions and balances are also 
disclosed in Note 38 to the financial statements.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202140
Biographical Information of Directors
No. Name Profession Nationality Born 
1. Mr. Jude Kofi Arthur Banker Ghanaian 1955 
2. Mr. Kofi Adomakoh Banker Ghanaian 1966
3. Mr. Socrates Afram Banker/ Chartered Accountant Ghanaian 1973 
4. Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey Banker/ Chartered Accountant Ghanaian 1974
5. Mrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah Banker, Management & Banking Consultant Ghanaian 1955 
6. Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III Business Executive/ Traditional Ruler Ghanaian 1970 
7. Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins Information Technologist Ghanaian 1956 
8. Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba Chartered Accountant Ghanaian 1971
9. Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah Chartered Accountant Ghanaian 1962
10. Alhaji Yakubu Adam Alhassan  Banker/ Business Executive Ghanaian 1966
11. Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asirifi   
(Appointed -24th Feb. 2022)Lawyer Ghanaian 1963
12. Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah 
(Appointed- 24th Feb. 2022)Financial & Investment Consultant Ghanaian 1970
13. Mr. Samuel Kwame Yedu Aidoo (Appointed-24th Feb. 2022)Banker Ghanaian 1975
14. Mr. Nik Amarteifio (Resigned, 7th Sept. 2021)Business Executive Ghanaian
15. Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge (Resigned, 7th Sept., 2021)Marketing Consultant Ghanaian
The Directors are responsible for the long term success of the Group, determining the strategic direction of the 
Group and reviewing operating, financial and risk exposures of the Group. There is a formal schedule of matters reserved for the Board of Directors, including approval of the Group’s annual business plan, the Group’s strategy, 
acquisitions, disposals and capital expenditure projects above certain thresholds, all guarantees, treasury 
policies, the financial statements, the Group’s dividend policy, transactions involving the issue or purchase of the Group’s shares, borrowing powers, appointments to the Board, alterations to the regulations, legal actions brought by or against the Group and the scope of delegation to Board committees, subsidiary boards and management committees. Responsibility for the development of policy and strategy and operational management is delegated to the Executive Directors and a management committee, which as at the date of this 
report includes three (3) executive Directors and eleven (11) senior managers.
Particulars of entries in the Interests Register during the financial year
No Director had any interest in contracts and proposed contracts with the Group during the year under review, 
hence there were no entries recorded in the Interests Register as required by 194(6), 195(1)(a) and 196 of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992).
Internal Control System
The Directors have overall responsibility for the Group’s internal control systems and annually review their effectiveness, including a review of financial, operational, compliance and risk management controls. The implementation and maintenance of the risk management and internal control systems are the responsibility of 
the Executive Directors and other senior management. The systems are designed to manage rather than 
eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and to provide reasonable, but not absolute, assurance against material misstatement or loss. The Directors have reviewed the effectiveness of the internal control systems, including controls related to financial, operational and reputational risks identified by the Group as at the reporting date and found no significant failings or weaknesses during this review.Report of the Directors to the members of GCB Bank Plc (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 41
Corporate Social Responsibility
Corporate social responsibility activities performed during the year have been disclosed in the note 41 of the 
financial statements.
Dividend
On the back of the strong financial performance recorded during the year under review, the Directors recommend a dividend of GHS 0.50 per share, subject to Bank of Ghana approval.
Auditor
The auditor, Deloitte and Touche Ghana, has expressed willingness to continue in office in accordance with Section 139(5) of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992).
Auditor’s fees
Included in the statement of profit or loss for the year is the agreed auditor’s remuneration of GHS 1,610,000 (2020: GHS 1,610,000). 
COVID-19 commentary
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a strain of novel coronavirus disease, COVID-19, a global pandemic. The breadth and depth of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and financial markets has continued to evolve with disruptive effects in industries in which we operate and beyond, while also contributing to increased market volatility and changes to the macroeconomic environment. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has continued to affect our employees, some of our clients 
and communities, with resultant impacts on our operations, financial results and present and future risks to our 
business. Details of the impact of Covid-19 have been outlined below;
Business and operational impact of COVID- 19
During the year, various aspects of the Group’s operations were also impacted. Below are the impacted areas of the Group’s business and how the Group responded to them.
• Lock down and social distancing 
Due to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, governments across the world have declared national lockdowns, which have resulted in extensive travel restrictions and quarantine measures being implemented. Businesses globally have had to limit or suspend their operations and as such, the COVID-19 measures implemented by 
governments globally have severely impacted a wide range of industries, including the financial sector. Due to 
the global economic downturn, a significant increase in the volatility of the financial and commodities markets worldwide has been noted. 
The Group has responded to the COVID-19 pandemic by taking several measures designed to protect the health 
of its employees and to minimize operational disruption and resulting provision of services to our customers, including adopting strict social distancing and cleaning measures in our branches and all other units of the 
Group, taking the temperature of employees and customers on daily basis as a prerequisite for entering our 
facilities, and instituting work from home protocols amongst other measures.
• COVID- 19 debt relief measures provided to customers
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and its resultant impact on the economy, a liquidity crisis was experienced by a large number of customers across the Group. In order to assist customers, the Group provided various relief measures to customers. In the retail and commercial segments, these included the following: 
• new facilities being granted, including the COVID-19 SME scheme guaranteed by the Government of Ghana through the National Board for Small Scale Industries;
• restructure of existing exposures with no change in the present value of the estimated future cash flows;  
• restructure of existing exposures with a change in the present value of the estimated future cash flows; and
• For wholesale exposures, bespoke debt relief measures were provided on a client-by-client basis. GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202142
Financial Statements Impact of COVID-19
Included in the operating expense for the reporting period is an amount of GHS 5 million (2020:14.4 million) 
COVID-19 expenses.  A reduction in the COVID-19 related expenses was due to the introduction and adoption of vaccines and easing of some restrictions in 2021.
Future outlook of COVID- 19
The global economy continues to come under the negative effects of COVID-19. Various governments and the world at large have not relented on their efforts aimed at getting a lasting solution in the form of cure for COVID-19 infection. There has been some breakthroughs with various vaccines ready and currently being 
administered in Ghana.
The issue of COVID-19 remains a major concern for the global and local economy and it is inherently impractical 
to accurately predict the full extent and duration of the economic impact of COVID-19 pandemic due to the unprecedented nature. Given these uncertainties, Covid-19 could impact:
• Fair value measurements;
• Ability of borrowers to meet their obligations under loan relationships;
• Modifications of financial assets and liabilities may be more frequent;
• Customer deposits; and
• COVID-19 related expenses 
The pandemic could also adversely affect demand for our services, and the Group’s ability to execute on our set strategies and initiatives and adversely affect our consolidated financial performance and consolidated financial 
position. 
We will continue to closely monitor and evaluate the nature and extent of the impact of Covid-19 to our business, 
consolidated financial performance results and consolidated financial position.
The Group continues to promote vaccination of its workforce and customers to control the spread of the disease. 
Different variants of the Coronavirus disease have emerged and it is the rapid rotation of the virus that remains a concern. This notwithstanding, we are witnessing gradual but steady uptake in vaccination and rebound to 
normalcy across several industries. This is encouraging and a good sign that even though the COVID-19 has not 
fully been contained, we have modified our lifestyle and are able to cope well with the disease. For the Group, the return to pre COVID-19 normalcy is boost of business and signals that the future can only be better.
We will continue to closely monitior and evaluate the nature and extent of the impact of COVID-19 to our 
business.
Going Concern assessment
The Directors reviewed the Group and Bank’s budgets and flow of funds forecasts and considered the Group and Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern in light of current and anticipated economic conditions. These budgets and flow of funds forecasts took the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic into consideration, including 
projections of the impact on the Group’s capital, funding and liquidity requirements, all of which have remained 
within internal targets and above regulatory requirements. 
As part of this assessment, the Directors considered the sufficiency of the Group’s financial resources throughout 
the pandemic. The management of the Group’s financial resources, which it defines as capital, funding and liquidity, and risk capacity, is a critical enabler of the achievement of the Group’s stated growth and return targets and is driven by the Group’s overall risk appetite. Forecast growth in earnings and balance sheet risk weighted assets (RWA) is based on the Group’s macroeconomic outlook and is evaluated against available 
financial resources, considering the requirements of capital providers, regulators and rating agencies. Report of the Directors to the members of GCB Bank Plc (Continued)The expected outcomes and constraints are then stress tested, and the Group sets targets through different 
business cycles and scenarios. 
On the basis of this review, and in light of the current financial position and profitable trading history, the 
directors are satisfied that the Group has adequate resources to continue in business for the foreseeable future. The going concern basis, therefore, continues to apply and has been adopted in the preparation of the annual financial statements.
The Directors confirm that to the best of their knowledge:
• the financial statements, prepared in accordance with applicable laws and the International Financial Reporting Standards, give a true and fair view of the Group and Bank’s financial position, performance and cash flows; and
• the state of the Group and Bank’s affairs is satisfactory.
Approval of consolidated and separate financial statements
The consolidated and separate financial statements set out on pages 59 to 62, which have been prepared on the going concern basis, were approved by the Board of Directors on 24 February, 2022 and were signed on its behalf by:
Mr. Jude Kofi Arthur
ChairmanMr. Kofi AdomakohManaging DirectorGCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 43GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202144
Dear Shareholders, 
With great pleasure, we present GCB Bank Plc’s (Bank) 2021 Corporate Governance Statement. 
The Bank’s approach to corporate governance and the governance practices in place are best described in the 
Corporate Governance Statement. The Bank’s purpose, vision and values are also supported by good Corporate Governance Principles. 
For shareholders, and other stakeholders value, the Bank is committed to fulfilling its Corporate Governance 
obligations and responsibilities in the best interests of the Bank. 
GCB Bank Plc is committed to best practice and has adopted a Corporate Governance Framework in accordance 
with international Corporate Governance principles, laws of Ghana such as Companies Act 2019 (Act 992), and the Bank & Specialized Deposit - Taking Institutions Act 2016, (Act 930). 
This Corporate Governance Statement is in accordance with the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive 
2018, Fit and Proper Person Directive 2019, Securities and Exchange Commission Corporate Governance Code 2020, Ghana Stock Exchange Listing Rules and Regulations and Mandatory Disclosure Items for Public Companies 
in Ghana from Securities and Exchange Commission.  
It is our commitment to guarantee that good corporate governance and its associated standards are entrenched 
in the ideas and business practices driven by the Board. 
The Board (the Governing Body) 
The Board is the highest decision making body of the Bank and provides strategic direction and guidance for 
our business and represents the interests of our shareholders through the creation of sustainable value. The Board continues to focus on our customers, our people, the communities and environment in which we operate 
and in doing so enhances long-term shareholder returns and stakeholder value.  
A robust Board Charter referred to as the Board Corporate Governance Framework is in place and compliant 
with Regulators Corporate Governance Directives (Securities and Exchange Commission Corporate Governance Code 2021 and Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive 2018) and internationally accepted best practices guides the way the Bank is governed. The Board Corporate Governance Framework outlines the roles and 
responsibilities of the Board.  
The Board ensures that the Bank’s governance processes align with regulators’ directives and framework. The 
Board aligns strategies with goals embedded with high level of ethics and integrity, defining roles and responsibilities, and managing risk effectively. Accordingly, the Board Charter is regularly reviewed annually for alignment. 
Roles and Responsibilities 
The Board guides the strategic direction of the Bank and represents the interests of our shareholders by overseeing activities that create sustainable value. The roles and responsibilities of the Board, including the matters that are specifically reserved to the Board and those delegated to management, are set out in the Board 
Corporate Governance Framework. 
The Board provides leadership of the Bank within the boundaries of Risk Appetite and a framework of prudent 
and effective controls which enable risk to be identified, assessed, measured and controlled. The Board sets the Bank’s strategic aims and risk appetite to support the strategy, ensuring that the necessary financial and human resources are in place for the Bank to meet its objectives.  
Separation of the Chairman and Managing Director Roles 
The Board Chairman, Mr. Jude Kofi Arthur is an Independent Non-Executive Director. 
The Chairman’s role includes but not limited to the following: Corporate Governance Statement• Providing effective leadership to the Board in relation to all Board matters; 
• Directing the agenda and conducting all Board meetings to facilitate discussions, challenges and decision-
making; 
• Acting as a conduit between Management and the Board, and being the key point of communication between the Board and Managing Director; 
• Taking a leading role in creating and maintaining an effective corporate governance system. 
  
The Managing Director, Mr. Kofi Adomakoh is an Executive Director on the Board of GCB Bank Plc, the 
Chairman of Executive Committee (EXCO) and Chairman of GCB Capital Ltd (GCL). He has delegated duties with 
authority from, and accountable to the Board for the development and successful implementation of the Bank’s 
strategy. His role among others includes but not limited to the following: 
• Developing Strategic Objectives for the business and achievement of planned results; and 
• The day-to-day management of the GCB’s Group’s operations, subject to the specified delegation of authority 
approved by the Board. 
The separation of authority is set out in writing and agreed by the Board in the Corporate Governance Framework. This enhances independent oversight of Executive Management by the Board and helps to ensure that no one individual on the Board has autonomous power, influence or authority. 
Board Composition 
The Board is made up of twelve (12) Directors, with nine (9) Non-Executive Directors out of which 30% are Independent Directors in line with the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive 2018.  
With the nine (9) Non-Executive Directors and three (3) Executive Directors, there are clearly defined roles 
within our Board structure for the category of Directors as documented in the Board Corporate Governance 
Framework. The Board has a rich blend of skills and knowledge, combined with the extensive experience required to guide our business in Governance, Banking and Finance, Accountancy, Law, Information Technology, Marketing, Entrepreneurship and Management. A skills matrix for the Board has been tabled below. 
Executive/Non- Executive Directors 
The Board of Directors provides clear and effective leadership across the Bank’s business activities. 
The table below highlights the skills matrix and profile of Directors:
No.  Name  Profession  Status  Born   Appointment date 
1.  Mr. Jude Kofi Arthur  Banker/Consultant  Non-Executive 
Director 1955  06/04/2017 
2.  Mr. Kofi Adomakoh  Banker  Executive  
Director  1966 15/11/2020 
3.  Mr. Socrates Afram  Banker/Chartered 
Accountant Executive Director 1973  24/03/2016 
4  Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey Banker/Chartered Accountant Executive Director  1974 20/01/2021 
5. Mr. Samuel Kwame Yedu Aidoo Banker Executive Director1975 24/02/2022
6.  Mrs. Lydia Essah  Banker/Management & Banking Consultant Non-Executive Director    1955  06/04/2017 
7.  Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III  Business Executive/ Traditional Ruler Non-Executive Director   1970  07/06/2017 
8.  Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins  Information Technologist Non-Executive  Director 1956  25/10/2017 GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 45GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202146
No.  Name  Profession  Status  Born   Appointment date 
8.  Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah  Chartered Accountant  Non-Executive 
Director 1962  25/10/2017 
9.  Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba  Chartered Accountant  Non-Executive  
Director 1971  25/10/2017 
 
10.  Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu  Banker/ Business 
Executive Non-Executive Director   1966  12/07/2018 
 
11.   Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah 
Asirifi Lawyer  Non-Executive  Director  1963  24/02/2022
12.  Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah  Financial & Investment Consultant Non-Executive Director  1970  24/02/2022
13.  Nik Amartiefio (resigned 7/9/2021) Business Executive Non-Executive Director    
14.  Edward Prince Amoatia Younge 
(resigned 7/9/2021)Marketing Consultant Non-Executive Director    
  
Two (2) of our Directors, Mr. Nik Amarteifio and Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge resigned from the Board 
effective 7th September 2021. Two (2) new Directors Lawyer Daniel Tweneboah Asirifi and Honourable Dr. 
Stephen Amoah were nominated to the Board of GCB Bank Plc to replace the two directors who exited after 
going through the Fit and Proper Persons Assessment and Due Diligence processes by the Bank of Ghana for their clearance and approvals. 
Independence of Board of Directors 
All directors are expected to bring independent and unfettered judgment to the Board’s deliberations.  
The larger number of Non-Executive Directors on the Board, makes the Board more independent and allows it 
to provide higher level of Corporate Governance to shareholders. It also satisfies our criteria for independence, 
which align with the guidance and recommendation provided in the Corporate Governance Framework.  
Each Director is expected to disclose any business or other relationship that he or she has directly, or as a 
partner, shareholder or officer of a company or other entity that has an interest in the Bank or a related entity. The Board considers information about any such interests or relationships, including any related financial or other details, when it assesses the Director’s independence. 
Effectiveness of the Board 
The Board is structured to ensure that the Directors provide GCB Bank Plc with the appropriate balance of skills, experience and knowledge as well as independence. Given the nature of GCB Bank’s business, experience of banking and financial services its clearly of benefit, that the Bank has a number of Directors with the right skill 
and experience mix. The Board also derives some benefits from Directors with experience in other fields. 
Board Committees 
The Board in 2021 reconstituted and merged some of its Committees from eight (8) Board Committees to six (6) 
Committees. These Committees assist the Board in carrying out its responsibilities. In deciding the committee memberships, the Board endeavours to make the best use of the range of skills and experience across board 
and share responsibility. Membership of the Committees is reviewed on an annual basis or as and when the 
need arises. 
To ensure effective oversight leadership, the Board receives the minutes/reports of all Committee meetings at 
Board meeting for ratification and approval.  Coporate Governance Statement (Continued)The Committees’ membership and functions are as follows: 
Audit Committee 
The Audit Committee was chaired by Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah (an Independent Non-Executive Director). 
Other members included Mr. Osmani Ayuba, Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu and Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge. 
The functions of the Committee among others include the following: 
• Overseeing the Internal Audit Co-sourcing arrangement;
• Reviewing the expertise, resources and experience of the Bank’s finance function;
• Monitoring and reviewing the integrity of the financial statements of the Bank including its monthly, 
quarterly, bi-annual and annual reports, trading statements and any other formal announcement relating to its financial performance, and reviewing any significant financial reporting issues and/or judgments 
contained therein; 
• Recommending the appointment of the External Auditor and to oversee the external audit process; 
• Approving Internal Audit plans, monitoring & reviewing the effectiveness of the Bank’s internal controls 
and internal audit function;  
• Operating as an overseer and a maker of recommendations to the Board for its consideration and final approval; and 
• Recommending the appointment of a Chief Internal Auditor. 
Risk Committee 
The Risk Committee was chaired by Mrs. Lydia Essah (an Independent Non-Executive Director). The other members were Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu, Mr. Ray Ankrah and Mr. Nik Amarteifio. 
• The Committee’s role is to assist and advise the Board in the governance and effective management of the Bank’s risk portfolio. 
• The functions of the Risk Committee among others include the following: 
• Establishing, reviewing, and recommending to the Board the Bank’s overall Risk Appetite as well as assessing the appropriateness of the strategy in the context of the Risk Appetite, taking account of the current and prospective macroeconomic and financial environment. 
• Reviewing and recommending the Bank’s Risk Management Framework (i.e. policies, processes, models and limits) to manage and mitigate risk within the approved Strategy and Risk Appetite to the Board for approval. 
• Monitoring the Bank’s risk exposures through the; 
• Review of the Bank’s risk profile 
• Review of management reports, monthly “key performance Indicators (KPIs), reports on any material breaches of risk limits, on the nature and extent of risk exposures of the Bank. 
Human Resource and Nominations Committee 
The Human Resource and Nominations Committee was chaired by Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III (a Non-Executive Director). The other members were Mr. Nik Amarteifio, Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu and Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge. 
The functions of the Committee among others include the following: 
• Establishing employment policies to support approved Human Resource strategy;  
• Overseeing the establishment of remuneration policies that promote the achievement of strategic 
objectives and encourage individual performance; 
• Considering risk to the Bank, which may arise from remuneration policies and practices that drive organization behaviours; 
• Regularly reviewing incentives scheme to ensure continued contribution to shareholders’ value; and 
• Developing strategies and policies for Board approval, in matters relating to recruitment, selection, training, motivation, development, reward and retention of staff. GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 47GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202148
• Regularly reviewing the structure, size and composition of the Board; 
• Giving full consideration to succession planning for Directors and other Senior Management; 
• Identifying and nominating for the approval of the Board, candidates to fill Board/Key Management 
vacancies as and when they arise; 
• Evaluating the balance of skills, knowledge, experience and diversity on the Board prior to any appointment to the Board; 
• Reviewing the results of the evaluation of Board performance; 
• Keeping under review the leadership needs of the Bank, Executive and Non- Executive; 
• Evaluating the Chairpersons of the various Committees. 
Board Credit Committee 
The Board Credit Committee was chaired by Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu (a Non-Executive Director). The other members were Mrs. Lydia Essah, Mr. Osmani Ayuba, Mr. Ray Ankrah and Mr. Prince Amoatia Younge. 
The functions of the Committee among others include the following:  
• Making recommendations for the Board’s approval in respect of credit requests made by customers;       
• Reviewing sector, single name, and product/asset class concentration exposure reports in order to 
manage large   credit exposures, and escalate any breaches to the Board taking into account the relevant Bank of Ghana publications; 
• Reviewing at least annually, limits with respect to concentration risk, and make recommendations to the Board as necessary; 
• Reviewing and monitoring the large credit exposure reports received from Management, and ensure that exposures  are maintained within Bank of Ghana and Board-approved limits; and 
• Determining if additional Management action is required to manage or mitigate the large credit exposures risk, and escalate issues to the Board where it is deemed appropriate to do so. 
IT/Digitalization and Procurement Committee 
The IT Digitalization and Procurement Committee was chaired by Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins (an Independent Non-Executive Director) .  The other members were Mrs. Lydia Essah, Mr. Osmani Ayuba and Nana Ama Ayensua 
Saara III.  The role of this Committee was merged with meetings on Cyber Security issues.
The functions of the Committee among others include the following: 
• Overseeing the development of GCB Bank’s Procurement Policy. 
• Oversight and reviewing of tender process and appropriate probity processes to ensure the ethical 
procurement of goods and services to ensure compliance with the Procurement Policy; 
• Ensuring strategic procurement objectives are developed and implemented through a procurement strategy to ensure that major investment decisions are procured strategically to enable prudent and efficient outcomes through market engagement; 
• Assessing the adequacy and effectiveness of internal controls and risks as they relate to procurement activities; 
• Reviewing and monitor procurement performance assessment and processes to identify improvement opportunities for the future; 
• Reviewing, and approving IT strategic plans, oversee major initiatives, 
• and allocate resources; 
• Establishing IT priorities for the Bank as a whole. Coporate Governance Statement (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 49
The Cyber security functions of the committee among others include the following: 
• Creating secure environment within “cyberspace” for the financial service industry and generate adequate 
trust and confidence in ICT systems as well as transactions in the cyberspace;  
• Creating assurance framework for design of security policies and for promotion of compliance to global security standards and best practices by way of cyber and information security assessment;  
• Improving the integrity of ICT products and services by establishing infrastructure for testing and validation of security of these products and services;  
 0Promoting continuous cyber and information security risk assessment. 
 0Promoting security awareness. 
 0The establishment of a state of the art Security Operation Centre (SOC) for the Bank. 
G-Money and Electronic Payment Committee 
The G-Money and Electronic Payment Committee was chaired by Mr. Nik Amartiefio (an Independent Non-Executive Director) . The other members were Mr. Francis Arthur-collins, Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III and Mr. 
Edward Prince Amoatia Younge 
The functions of the Committee among others include the following: 
• Providing direction on matters related to enhancement of G-Money and other electronic channels as well as 
efficient customer service in pursuit of delivering on the Bank’s digital transformation agenda which is customer centric; 
• Assisting Management in developing effective strategies to stay ahead of the competition in the digital space; 
• Reviewing report from Management on strategies to keep the Bank abreast  with developments in the payment industry; 
• Ensuring and driving the development and maintenance of the right payment infrastructure at all times by the Bank; 
• Reviewing the metrics and indicators that provide information on customer’s interaction with the Bank using the digital channels and providing direction to management on the actions to be taken to improve the metrics; 
• Providing guidance to Management on developing a policy framework for the development/introduction of digital products/solutions; 
• Providing inputs on the digital products introduced by the Bank with a view to ensuring suitability and appropriateness;  
• Reviewing the actions being taken by management to ensure reduction in payment fraud and other cybercrimes; 
• Ensuring that adequate policies are in place to protect customer data and privacy; 
• Ensuring the investment by Management in the Bank’s digital capabilities is aligned to the Bank’s digital strategy as approved by the Board; 
• Reviewing results of customer surveys conducted that provide quantitative and qualitative information on the state of customer experience.  
• Review the Bank’s Digital Innovation performance via: 
    i.   G-Money quarterly performance  
    ii.  Card Issuance and usage report     iii. Website performance and capabilities 
    iv   Internet banking and SMS messaging quarterly reports 
    v.  Quarterly report on role out and performance of merchant point of sale device,     vi. Customer communication platforms to include social media, social listening & automation     vii. Delivery of real time customer complaint settlement. GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202150
• Review of the Bank’s progress towards achieving its budget in customer growth using electronic products 
and channels and recommend changes for improvement if any.  
The Company Secretary 
The Company Secretary provides advice and support to the Board, and is accountable to the Board, through the Chairman, for all matters relating to the proper functioning of the Board and its Committees. The Company Secretary is responsible for advising the Board on governance matters and ensuring compliance with Board and 
Board Committee framework, terms of reference and procedures.  
The Company Secretary was appointed by the Board. The Company Secretary performs the following duties among others: 
a. Serves as an interface between the Board and Management and support the Board Chairman in ensuring 
the smooth functioning of the Board 
b. Ensure that board procedures are followed and reviewed regularly; 
c. Ensure that the applicable rules and regulations for the conduct of the affairs of the Board are complied with; 
d. Provide the Board as a whole and individual Directors with detailed guidance as to how their responsibilities should be properly discharged in the best interest of the Bank and on good governance; 
e. Keep abreast of, and inform the board of current corporate governance thinking and practice; 
f. Assist the Nominations & Monitoring Committee with the induction and continuous development of 
Directors; 
g. In charge of the Secretariat that maintains the following statutory records in accordance with legal 
requirement from the Companies Act 2019 (Act 992); 
• Interest Register  
• Register of Holdings of Directors – Shares and debentures  
• Register of Directors and Secretary  
• Related Party Transaction Register 
Board Activities and Development 
Annual Work Plan 
The Annual Work Plan provides a list of scheduled meetings and Board Events that help the Board to shift the 
balance of its time towards matters that are important. It forces the Board to be realistic and prioritize its available time to properly consider key decisions and other matters of strategic significance. The Board of 
Directors’ follows an Annual Work Plan and covers all the necessary areas of its work during the year. 
In 2021, apart from their scheduled activities and development, the Board made time for stakeholder 
engagements by meeting the External Auditors, Employees Unions and other consultants of the Bank. 
Board Development 
The Board encourages Directors to undertake continuing education and training to develop and maintain the skills and knowledge needed to perform their role as Directors effectively. Some of the courses attended by Directors included: 
a.  Enterprise Risk Planning/ Enterprise Risk Management and Banking in the future organized by Maddison Pine 
b.  AML and Cyber Security Training organized by Purple Almond Consult c.  Corporate Governance Training organized by Ministry of Finance/ SIGA   Coporate Governance Statement (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 51
Annual Board Certification for Directors 
Purple Almond Consult took the Board through Annual Certification Programme in March 2021. The Board of 
GCB Bank Plc.  was duly certified in accordance with Section 12a of the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive 2018 that:  
i. The Board had independently assessed and documented its Corporate Governance process and in effect has successfully achieved its objectives. 
ii. The Directors were aware of their responsibilities to the Bank as persons charged with governance. 
Board Performance Evaluation 
The Board reviews its performance, and the performance of the individual Directors, every year. As part of the annual evaluation process, the Board evaluates the quality of the Board meetings and the way the Chairman chairs the meetings. The various Committees and their meeting proceedings are also evaluated to improve 
leadership, clarify roles and responsibilities, and improve teamwork, greater accountability, better decision-
making, improved communication and more efficient Board operations. 
An In-house self-performance evaluation was administered and a copy of the results submitted to the Bank of 
Ghana in line with the Corporate Governance Directive 2018. In summary, the result was that the performance of the Board and its Board Committees was effective for the year under review.
Code of Ethics for the Board and Employees 
Code of Ethics for the Board is enshrined in the Board Charter referred to as the Corporate Governance Framework which is reviewed annually in addition to a Code of Ethics Policy for Directors. 
The Code of Ethics for Board and employees have been drafted and they describe the standards of conduct 
expected of the Board, Management and staff.  
The principles making up the Code are: 
• acting with honesty, integrity, and due skill, care and diligence; 
• complying with laws and with our policies; 
• undertaking the right thing by our customers; 
• respecting confidentiality and do not misuse information; 
• placing importance on our professionalism; 
• working as a team; and 
• managing conflicts of interest responsibly. 
The Code’s guiding principles help the Bank to make the right decisions, ensuring that the reputation of the 
Bank is uphold. As Directors and employees of the Bank, we are also committed to creating greater accountability, transparency and trust with our customers and the broader community. With that in mind, the principles within our Code also reflect the community’s expectations of us. GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202152
Board Meetings and Attendance 
The Board met on a regular basis in 2021. The Board Annual Work Plan entails scheduled meetings, Strategy 
Session and Board Retreat. The Board had 14 scheduled and unscheduled meetings.  
The Board Committees have delegated authority to meet from time to time to undertake specific extra duties 
on behalf of the Board.  
Below is the tabled attendance for Board and Committee Meetings in the year 2021. 
Name of Director Board 
Meetings  Audit HR & 
Nomina -
tions  Risk  G-Money 
and 
Electronic 
Payments  Credit   IT 
Digitali -
zation & 
Procure -
ment 
Mr. Jude Arthur        14/14 -- - - - -
Mr. Kofi Adomakoh   14/14 - - - - - -
Mr. Socrates Afram                  14/14 - - - - - -
Mr. Emmanuel O. Lamptey     13/14 - - - - - -
Mr. Ray Ankrah                                 10/14   5/5 -  2/2  - - -
Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins    14/14   - -    4/4  2/2  3/3
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba   9/14  4/5   -   -   -    3/3
Mrs. Lydia Essah         14/14 - -  2/2 -  2/2  3/3
Nana Ama Nana Ama 
Ayensua Saara III     14/14 -  2/2 -  3/4  2/2  3/3
Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu   13/14  3/3  2/2  2/2 -  2/2   -
Mr. Nik Amarteifio (resigned 7/9/21)   9/10    2/2  2/2  4/4 - -
Mr. Edward P. Amoatia Younge (resigned 7/9/21)   10/10  4/4  2/2 -   3/4   - -
  
Directors’ Remuneration 
Determining the remuneration of the Directors is subject to shareholder approval. The Board did not seek for 
increment in their remuneration from Shareholders at its last AGM in 2021 and has accordingly maintained their remuneration for the year 2021.The Board Chairman was paid a monthly fee of GHS 19,444 and a sitting 
allowance of GHS 6,250 per Board meeting. The other Non-Executive Directors were paid a monthly fee of GHS 
11,552 and a sitting allowance of GHS 4,688 per meeting.  
The details of the Directors’ remunerations for both Executive and Non-executive Directors can be found Note 
38 as part of notes to financial statement in the annual report. 
Disclosures on Conflicts of interests and Related Party transactions 
The Corporate Governance Framework is designed to ensure that actual, perceived or potential conflicts of interests are identified, managed or prevented. The framework outlines the organizational and administrative arrangements that have been put in place to support the identification and management of conflicts of interest 
which guarantee that Directors act at all times in the best interests of the Bank.  
Directors disclose interests, if any, at the beginning of every board meeting and also submit a written declaration. Coporate Governance Statement (Continued)Details of all Directors’ conflicts of interest are recorded in Interests and Related Party Transaction Registers 
which are maintained by the Secretariat in compliance with the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive and Companies Act 2019 (Act 992). 
External Directorship and Other Engagements 
The Directors of GCB Bank Plc are very experienced, and knowledgeable leaders who have other responsibilities and serves on other Boards. To ensure that Directors give greater time commitment to their oversight function in the Bank, no director holds more than five (5) directorship positions at a time in both financial and non-
financial institutions and in compliance with Section 45 of the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive. 
Internal Controls System 
The Group’s internal controls framework covers fi nancial, operational, compliance, legal and information 
technology controls, as well as risk management policies and systems. 
The Board, supported by the Audit Committee and the Risk Committee, oversees the Bank’s system of internal 
controls and risk management. The Group has three lines of defense when it comes to risk taking where each line of defense has a clear responsibility.  
Our business units are our fi rst line of defense for risk. This includes identi fication and management of risks 
inherent in their businesses/countries and ensuring that we remain within approved boundaries of our risk 
appetite and policies. 
Corporate oversight and control functions such as risk, compliance and parts of technology and finance form 
the second line of defense. They are responsible for design and maintenance of the internal control frameworks covering fi nancial, operational, compliance and information technology controls as well as risk management 
policies and systems.  
Internal Audit forms the third line of defense.  It provides an independent assessment and assurance on the 
reliability, adequacy and effectiveness of our system of internal controls, risk management procedures, 
governance framework and processes. GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 53GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202154
Report on the Audit of the Consolidated and Separate Financial Statements
Opinion 
We have audited the consolidated and separate financial statements of GCB Bank Plc and its subsidiary (the 
Group and the Bank), set out on pages 59 to 151, which comprise the consolidated and separate statements of financial position as at 31 December 2021, and the consolidated and separate statements of profit or loss and 
other comprehensive income, consolidated and separate statements of changes in equity and consolidated and 
separate statements of cash flows for the year then ended, the notes to the consolidated and separate financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory disclosures 
In our opinion, the consolidated and separate financial statements give a true and fair view of the consolidated 
and separate financial position of GCB Bank Plc as at 31 December 2021, and its consolidated and separate financial performance and consolidated and separate cash flows for the year then ended in accordance with 
International Financial Reporting Standards, the requirements of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the 
Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking-Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).
Basis for Opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISAs). Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors’ Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of our report. We are independent of the Group and Bank in accordance with the requirements 
of the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants’ (IESBA), International Code of Ethics for Professional 
Accountants (including International Independence Standards) (IESBA code) and other independence requirements applicable to performing audits of financial statements in Ghana. We have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with the IESBA Code and other ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of financial statements in Ghana. 
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our 
opinion.  
Key Audit Matter
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgement, were of most significance in our audit of the consolidated and separate financial statements of the current period. These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the consolidated and separate financial statements as a whole, and in forming our 
opinion thereon, and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters. We have determined that there 
are no key audit matters to communicate in our report with regard to the audit of the separate financial statements of the Bank for the current period.Independent Auditor’s Report
to the shareholders of GCB Bank Plc
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 55
Key Audit Matter 
IFRS 9 Expected Credit Losses Response
As at December 31, 2021, the Group’s loan and 
advances portfolio was GHS 5.2 billion with an 
associated impairment allowance for expected credit 
losses (“ECL” or “allowance for impairment”) of GHS 810 million. 
As described in Note 4, ECL represents a complex 
accounting estimate, which is based on management’s 
evaluation of probable loan losses inherent in the loan portfolio.
Corporate loans are individually significant component 
of the loans and advances account balance, representing 60% of the gross loans & advances 
balance. Allowance for impairment arising on corporate 
loans represent 95% of the ECL at 31 December 2021. The areas of significant management judgement within the ECL measurement process include:
• The assessment of whether an exposure has met predefined default criteria as at the reporting 
date (i.e. a trigger event that has caused a 
deterioration in credit risk and resulted in migration of the loan from Stage 2 to Stage 3);
• Loss Given Default (LGD) — This is an estimate of the loss arising of default. It is based on the 
difference between the contractual cash flows 
due and those that the lender would expect to receive, including from any collateral.  Calibration of the LGD model is complex and requires 
management to accurately evaluate loss rates on 
secured and unsecured loan assets.
Expected credit losses is a key audit matter due to the level of subjective judgement applied in determining ECL.We performed the following procedures on the ECL for corporate loans and advances with the assistance of our credit specialists:
• Updated our understanding of management’s processes around the measurement of the ECL 
including management’s modelling 
methodology, incorporation of assumptions and input data.
• Updated our understanding of management’s policies and procedures around the reliability of 
qualitative and quantitative information as well 
as the calibration of the ECL model and ECL output. 
• Assessed the design and implementation of the relevant financial reporting controls as well as 
the general and application computer controls 
relating to input data and delinquency (days past due), early alert monitoring, LGD and Staging 
• Assessed conformity of management’s ECL accounting policy in the context of IFRS 9 and 
regulatory directives.
• Assessed the appropriateness of the ECL 
methodology, including any refinements against 
actual experience and industry practice.
• Using an audit sample, agreed the input data 
(days past due, delinquency) to underlying audit 
evidence including loan systems data, inquiries 
from relevant Bank personnel and loan documentation. 
• For a sample of loans identified by management as having no indicators of significant increases 
in credit risk (SICR) and/or default criteria, we 
determined if this was reasonable by forming an independent view based on available information (generated internally by the Bank 
or publicly available) and respective industry 
and segment information on whether SICR or default indicators were present
• Assessed the Loss Given Default model for 
appropriate calibration of secured and 
unsecured loan assets, default and write off  information.  
Based on the procedures described above, we did not identify any material misstatement relating to the ECL 
measurement on Corporate loans and advances.
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202156
Other Information
The directors are responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the Report of the 
Directors, the Statement of Directors’ Responsibilities, the Corporate Governance Report, the Chairman’s Statement, the Report of the Audit Committee, which we obtained prior to the date of this report, and the 
Annual Report, which is expected to be made available to us after that date. The other information does not 
include the consolidated and separate financial statements and our auditor’s report thereon.
Our opinion on the consolidated and separate financial statements does not cover the other information and we 
do not and will not express an audit opinion or any form of assurance conclusion thereon. 
In connection with our audit of the consolidated and separate financial statements, our responsibility is to read 
the other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with 
the consolidated and separate financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If, based on the work we have performed on the other information obtained prior to the date of this auditor’s report, we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in this regard.
Responsibilities of the Directors for the Consolidated and Separate Financial Statements
The directors are responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated and separate financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards, the requirements of the Companies  Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking-Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) and for such 
internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of consolidated and separate 
financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. 
In preparing the consolidated and separate financial statements, the directors are responsible for assessing the 
Group’s and the Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the 
Group and/or the Bank or to cease operations, or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Consolidated and Separate Financial Statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated and separate financial 
statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a 
guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs will always detect a material misstatement when it 
exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these consolidated and separate financial statements. 
As part of an audit in accordance with ISAs, we exercise professional judgement and maintain professional 
scepticism throughout the audit. We also: 
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated and separate financial 
statements, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The 
risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from 
error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. Independent Auditor’s Report to the shareholders of 
GCB Bank Plc (Continued)
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 57
• Obtain an understanding of internal controls relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that 
are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Group’s and the Bank’s internal controls. 
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by the directors. 
• Conclude on the appropriateness of the directors’ use of the going concern basis of accounting and based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Group’s and the Bank’s ability to continue as a going 
concern. If we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are required to draw attention in our 
auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the consolidated and separate financial statements or, if such 
disclosures are inadequate, to modify our opinion. Our conclusions are based on the audit evidence 
obtained up to the date of our auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may cause the 
Group and the Bank to cease to continue as a going concern. 
• Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the consolidated and separate financial statements, including the disclosures, and whether the consolidated and separate financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation. 
• Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the financial information of the entities or business activities within the Group to express an opinion on the consolidated financial statements. We are responsible for the direction, supervision and performance of the group audit. We remain solely 
responsible for our audit opinion.
We communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and 
timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that we identify during our audit. 
We also provide those charged with governance with a statement that we have complied with relevant ethical 
requirements regarding independence, and to communicate with them all relationships and other matters that 
may reasonably be thought to bear on our independence, and where applicable, actions taken to eliminate 
threats or safeguards applied. 
From the matters communicated with those charged with governance, we determine those matters that were 
of most significance in the audit of the consolidated and separate financial statements of the current year and are therefore the key audit matters. We describe these matters in our auditor’s report unless law or regulation 
precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, in extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a 
matter should not be communicated in our report because the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication. 
In accordance with the Seventh Schedule of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) we expressly state that:
1. We have obtained the information and explanations, which to the best of our knowledge and belief were 
necessary for the purpose of the audit.
2. In our opinion:
• proper books of account have been kept by the Group and Bank, so far as appears from our examination of those books.
• the information and explanations given to us, were in the manner required by the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and give a true and fair view of the:
a. statements of financial position of the Group and Bank at the end of the financial year, and 
b. statements of profit or loss and other comprehensive income for the financial year.
3. The Group and Bank’s statements of financial position and  statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive 
income are in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202158
4. We are independent of the Group and the Bank, pursuant to Section 143 of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992).
The Banks and Specialized Deposit-Taking Institution Act, 2016 (Act 930) requires that we state certain matters 
in our report. We hereby state that:
1. We confirm that the accounts give a true and fair view of the state of the affairs of the Bank and the results of operations for the year under review.
2. We were able to obtain all the information and explanation required for the efficient performance of our duties as auditors.
3. We confirm that the transactions of the Bank were within its powers.
4. In our opinion, the Bank has generally complied with the provisions of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 
2020 (Act 1044), the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2008 (Act 762) and Regulations made under these enactments.
5. The Bank has generally complied with the provisions of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking 
Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).
The engagement partner on the audit resulting in this independent auditor’s report is Daniel Kwadwo Owusu (ICAG/P/1327).
For and on behalf of Deloitte & Touche (ICAG/F/2022/129)
Chartered Accountants
The Deloitte Place, Plot No.71
Off George Walker Bush HighwayNorth DzorwuluAccra, Ghana
28 February, 2022Independent Auditor’s Report to the shareholders of 
GCB Bank Plc (Continued)
GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202159
2021 2020
 Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Note(s) Bank Group Bank Group
Interest income 9  2,369,457  2,379,370  1,930,141  1,938,908 
Interest expense 10  (484,620)  (484,527)  (430,255)  (430,210)
Net interest income  1,884,837  1,894,843  1,499,886  1,508,698 
Fee and commission income 11 390,408 410,277 315,716 329,702 
Fee and commission expense 12  (50,749)  (50,749)  (51,722)  (51,722)
Net fee and commission income 339,659 359,528 263,994 277,980 
Net trading income 13 157,540 157,540 166,628 166,628 
Other operating income 14 9,576 15,582 7,600 14,374 
Operating income 2,391,612 2,427,493  1,938,108  1,967,680 
Net impairment loss on financial assets 15  (324,800)  (324,800)  (219,647)  (219,647)
Personnel expenses 17  (637,316)  (641,555)  (559,950)  (561,933)
Depreciation and amortisation 29,30  (148,171)  (148,466)  (142,467)  (142,660)
Other expenses 16  (471,520)  (473,725)  (414,155)  (425,048)
Operating profit 809,805 838,947 601,889 618,392 
Share of profit of associates, net of tax 28 -  (6,972) -  (7,566)
Profit before income tax 809,805 831,975 601,889 610,826 
Income tax expense 18  (253,138)  (259,694)  (162,388)  (165,437)
Profit for the year 556,667 572,281 439,501 445,389 Statements of Profit or Loss and Other 
Comprehensive Income
For the year ended 31 December 2021GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202160
2021 2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Note Bank Group Bank Group
Other comprehensive income:
Items that will not be reclassified to 
profit or loss:
Re-measurements on net defined benefit liability/asset 35 4,540 4,540 14,192 14,192 
Fair value of equity instruments 24 1,446 284 106      (4,113)
Income tax relating to items that will not be reclassified20 1,337  629  (3,563)  3,977
Total items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss7,323 5,453 10,735 14,056 
Items that may be reclassified to profit or loss:        
Exchange differences on translating foreign operations 28  -  (8,836)  -  (1,211)
Share of comprehensive income of associates 28  - (4,314)  -  401 
Net gain from equity investments - 14,139 - -
Income tax relating to items that may be 
reclassified  -  -  -  - 
Total items that may be reclassified to profit or loss - 989  -  (810)
Other comprehensive income for the 
year net of taxation7,323 6,442 10,735 13,246 
Total comprehensive income for the year563,990 578,723 450,236 458,635 
Profit attributable to:        
Owners of the parent 556,667 572,281 439,501 445,389 
Non-controlling interest -  -  -  - 
  556,667 572,281 439,501 445,389 
Total comprehensive income attributable to:       
Owners of the parent 563,990 578,723 450,236 458,635
Non-controlling interest - - - -
  563,990 578,723 450,236 458,635 
Earnings per share        
Basic earnings per share (GHp) 21 210 216  166  168 
Diluted earnings per share (GHp) 21 210 216  166  168 
The notes on pages 69 to 152 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.Statements of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income
For the year ended 31 December 2021 (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202161
  2021 2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Note Bank Group Bank Group
Assets      
Cash and cash equivalents 22 2,301,092 2,301,092 1,567,241 1,567,241 
Non-pledged trading assets 23 477,658 477,658  221,339  221,339 
Investments (other than securities) 24  3,779 26,366  2,333  18,534 
Loans and advances to customers 25i 4,306,380 4,306,380 3,612,588 3,612,588 
Advances to banks 25ii 201,030  201,030  200,904  200,904 
Investment securities 26 9,707,421 9,765,840 8,575,901 8,622,846 
Investments in associates 28  28,274  82,280  28,274  91,681 
Investments in subsidiary 27  1,000 -  1,000 - 
Deferred tax assets 20 237,927  238,171  157,455  158,465 
Current tax assets 19 - -  26,255  25,808 
Intangible assets 30 167,999  168,226  190,921  191,136 
Other assets 31 527,263  536,552  460,432  462,701 
Property, equipment and right-of-use 
assets29 300,458 301,332  280,013  280,654 
Total assets   18,260,281 18,404,927 15,324,656 15,453,897 
Liabilities          
Deposits from banks & other financial institutions32i 747,589 747,589 615,418 615,418 
Deposits from customers 32ii 13,165,666 13,154,527 11,352,518 11,345,240 
Borrowings 34 988,073 988,073  772,525  772,525 
Current tax liabilities 19 54,580 56,247  - - 
Employee benefit obligation 35  113,464 113,464  113,322  113,322 
Other liabilities 33  643,877 646,556  421,581  421,394 
Total liabilities   15,713,249 15,706,456 13,275,364 13,267,899 
Equity          
Stated capital 36i  500,000  500,000  500,000  500,000 
Retained earnings 1,434,337 1,547,835 1,013,504 1,111,387 
Statutory reserve 36ii  639,555 639,555  569,971  569,971 
Fair value reserve 36iv (106) 14,997 (1,754)  5,395 
Other reserves 36v (26,754) (3,916) (32,429) (755)
Total shareholders’ equity   2,547,032 2,698,471 2,049,292 2,185,998 
Total liabilities and shareholders’ 
equity  18,260,281 18,404,927 15,324,656 15,453,897 
The notes on pages 69 to 152 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.Statements of Financial Position
As at 31 December 2021GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202162
The consolidated and separate financial statements and the notes on pages 59 to 152 were approved by the 
Board of Directors on 28 February, 2022 and were signed on its behalf by:
Mr. Jude Kofi Arthur
ChairmanMr. Kofi AdomakohManaging DirectorStatements of Financial Income as at 31 December 2021 (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202163
Stated 
capitalFair value 
reservesOther 
reservesStatutory 
reservesTotal 
reservesRetained 
earningsTotal 
equity
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Bank
Balance at 
1 January 2021 500,000  (1,754)  (32,429)  569,971 535,788 1,013,504 2,049,292 
Total comprehensive income, net of 
income tax:         
Profit for the year - -  -  -  - 556,667 556,667
Other comprehensive 
income, net of income tax:
Fair value change 
in equity instruments - 1,648  -  - 1,648  - 1,648
Re-measurement of defined benefit liability - - 5,675  - 5,675  - 5,675 
Total other comprehensive 
income - 1,648 5,675  - 7,323 -  7,323
Total comprehensive 
income for the year - 1,648 5,675  - 7,323 556,667  563,990 
Transfer to/from reserves:             
Statutory reserves - -  - 69,584 69,584  (69,584) - 
Total Transfer to/
from reserves - -  - 69,584 69,584 (69,584) - 
Transactions with owners             
Dividends - -  -  -  - (66,250) (66,250)
Total transactions 
with equity 
holders - -  -  -  - (66,250) (62,250)
Balance at 
31 December 2021 500,000  (106) (26,754) 639,555  612,695 1,434,337 2,547,032 
The notes on pages 69 to 152 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.Statements of Changes in Equity
For the year ended 31 December 2021GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202164
Stated 
capitalFair value 
reservesOther 
reservesStatutory 
reservesTotal 
reservesRetained 
earningsTotal 
equity
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Bank
Balance at 1 January 
2020 500,000  (1,845)  (43,073)  460,096  415,178  736,878 1,652,056 
Total comprehensive 
income, net of 
income tax:         
Profit for the year - -  -  -  - 439,501  439,501 
Other 
comprehensive 
income, net of 
income tax:
Fair value change in 
equity instruments - 91  -  - 91  -  91
Re-measurement of defined benefit liability - - 10,644  - 10,644  -  10,644
Total other comprehensive 
income - 91 10,644  - 10,735 -  10,735
Total comprehensive income for the year - 91 10,644  - 10,735 439,501  450,236 
Transfer to/from 
reserves:             
Statutory reserves - -  - 109,875 109,875  (109,875) - 
Total Transfer to/from reserves - -  - 109,875 109,875  (109,875) - 
Transactions with owners             
Dividends - -  -  -  - (53,000) (53,000)
Total transactions with equity holders - -  -  -  - (53,000) (53,000)
Balance at 31 December 2020500,000  (1,754) (32,429) 569,971  535,788  1,013,504 2,049,292 
The notes on pages 69 to 152 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.Statements of Changes in Equity for the year ended 31 December 2021 (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202165
Stated 
capitalFair value 
reservesOther 
reservesStatutory 
reservesTotal 
reservesRetained 
earningsTotal 
equity
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Group
Balance at 1 January 
2021500,000  5,395  (755) 569,971 574,611 1,111,387 2,185,998 
Total comprehensive income, net of income tax:             
Profit for the year - -  -  -  - 572,281  572,281 
Other comprehensive income, net of 
income tax:
Fair value change in 
equity instruments, 
net of tax - (222)  -  - (222)  -  (222)
Re-measurement of defined benefit liability, net of tax - - 5,675  - 5,675  - 5,675
Share of associate OCI -   (4,314)  -  -   (4,314)  -   (4,314)
Addition of associates - 14,139  (8,836) - 14,139 14,139
Foreign currency translation differences for foreign operations - - -  - (8,836)  - (8,836)
Total other comprehensive income - 9,603 (3,161)  - 6,442  - 6,442 
Total comprehensive income for the year -  9,603 (3,161)  - 6,442 572,281 578,723 
Transfer to/from reserves             
Statutory reserve - -  - 69,584 69,584 (69,584) - 
Total transfer to/from reserves - -  - 69,584 69,584 (69,584) - 
Transactions with shareholders             
Dividends - -  -  -  - (66,250) (66,250)
Total transactions with equity holders - -  -  -  - (66,250) (66,250)
Balance at 31 December 2021 500,000 14,998  (3,916) 639,555 650,637 1,547,835 2,698,471 
The notes on pages 69 to 152 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements .Statements of Changes in Equity for the year ended 31 December 2021 (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202166
Stated 
capitalFair value 
reservesOther 
reservesStatutory 
reservesTotal 
reservesRetained 
earningsTotal 
equity
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Group
Balance at 1 January 
2020500,000  1,582  (10,188)  460,096 451,490  828,873  1,780,363 
Total comprehensive 
income, net of 
income tax:             
Profit for the year - -  -  -  - 445,389  445,389 
Other 
comprehensive 
income, net of 
income tax:
Fair value change in 
equity instruments, net of tax -  3,412  -  - 3,412  -  3,412 
Re-measurement of defined benefit 
liability, net of tax - - 10,644  - 10,644  -  10,644 
Share of associate OCI -  401  -  - 401  - 401 
Foreign currency translation 
differences for foreign operations - -  (1,211)  - (1,211)  - (1,211)
Total other comprehensive income -  3,813 9,433  - 13,246  -  13,246 
Total comprehensive income for the year -  3,813 9,433  - 13,246 445,389  458,635 
Transfer to/from reserves             
Statutory reserve - -  - 109,875 109,875 (109,875) - 
Total transfer to/from reserves - -  - 109,875 109,875 (109,875) - 
Transactions with 
shareholders             
Dividends - -  -  -  - (53,000) (53,000)
Total transactions 
with equity holders - -  -  -  - (53,000) (53,000)
Balance at 31 December 2020500,000  5,395  (755) 569,971 574,611 1,111,387 2,185,998 
The notes on pages 69 to 152 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.Statements of Changes in Equity for the year ended 31 December 2021 (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202167
         2021 2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Note(s) Bank Group Bank Group
Cash flows from operating activities
Profit for the period 556,667 572,281 439,501 445,389 
Adjustments for:
Depreciation and amortisation 29 148,169  148,464  142,467  142,660 
Net impairment loss on financial assets 15  324,800 324,800  219,647  219,647 
Employee benefit expense 17&36  20,995  20,995  24,240  24,240 
Share of loss/(profit) of associates 28 -  6,972 -  7,566 
PPE written off 29 - -  413  413 
Net interest income 9,10 (1,884,837) (1,894,843) (1,499,886) (1,508,698)
Dividend income 14  (571)  (6,578)  (702)  (7,476)
(Profit)/Loss on sale of property and 
equipment14 (137) (137)  435  435 
Foreign exchange gain 13 (45,552) (45,552) (95,835) (95,835)
Income tax expense 18  253,138 259,694  162,388  165,437 
    (627,328) (613,904) (607,332) (606,222)
Changes in non-pledged trading assets 23  (256,319)  (256,319)  (78,549)  (78,549)
Changes in derivative assets  - -  236  236 
Changes in advances to banks 25ii (126) (126)   8,710   8,710 
Changes in loans and advances to 
customers25i (1,018,592) (1,018,592) (244,582) (244,582)
Changes in other assets 31  (66,830)  (73,851)  (159,891)  (162,146)
Changes in deposit from banks and other 
financial institutions32i  132,171 132,171  113,507  113,507 
Changes in deposits from customers 32i 1,813,148 1,809,287  2,011,910  2,024,362 
Changes in borrowings 34 215,548 215,548  314,947  314,947 
Changes in other liabilities 33 222,296 225,161  85,348  85,720 
Employee benefit paid 35  (16,312)  (16,312)  (15,119)  (15,119)
Cash (used in)/ generated from operations   397,656  403,063 1,429,185  1,440,864
Interest received 2,389,140 2,399,061  1,814,947 1,824,141
Dividend received            571        10,086            702          7,476
Interest paid   (478,184)   (478,277)   (314,330)   (314,330)
Net income tax paid     (251,439)   (256,715)   (257,544)   (259,426)
Net cash from operating activities    2,057,744  2,077,218 2,672,960 2,698,725 Statements of Cash Flow
For the year ended 31 December 2021GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202168
         2021 2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Note(s) Bank Group Bank Group
Cash flows from investing activities          
Purchase of investments (other than 
securities)     24bi  -  (7,549)  -  (7,207) 
Purchase of investment securities 26 (1,157,639) (1,169,024) (2,579,308) (2,597,464)
Purchase of property, equipment & right-of-use asset29  (88,735)  (89,229 )  (82,039)  (82,221)
Proceeds from the sale of property, 
equipment & right-of- use assets29 461  461  456  456 
Purchase of intangible assets 30 (57,282)  (57,328)  (60,201)  (60,421)
Net cash used in investing activities   (1,303,195) (1,322,669) (2,721,092) (2,746,857)
Cash flows from financing activities
Dividends paid  (66,250)  (66,250)  (53,000)  (53,000)
Net cash used in financing activities (66,250) (66,250)  (53,000)   (53,000)
Net (decrease)/increase in cash and 
cash 688,299 688,299 (5,297) (5,297)
Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January 22  1,567,241  1,567,241  1,572,538  1,572,538 
Effect of Exchange rate fluctuations on 
cash held 45,552 45,552 - - 
Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 22   2,301,092   2,301,092   1,567,241   1,567,241 
The notes on pages 69 to 152 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.Statements of Cash Flow (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202169
1.  Reporting entity
GCB Bank Plc is a limited liability company incorporated and domiciled in Ghana. These consolidated financial 
statements as at and for the year ended 31 December 2021 comprise the Bank and its subsidiary, (together referred to as the ‘Group’) and the Group’s interest in associates. The separate financial statements as at and for 
the year ended 31 December 2021 comprise the financial statements of the Bank.
The Bank is listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange.
2.  New and amended standards and interpretations
2.1.1 Impact of the initial application of Interest Rate Benchmark Reform
In the prior year, the Group adopted the Phase 1 amendments Interest Rate Benchmark Reform—Amendments to 
IFRS 9/IAS 39 and IFRS 7. These amendments modify specific hedge accounting requirements to hedge accounting to continue for affected hedges during the period of uncertainty before the hedged items or hedging instruments 
are amended as a result of the interest rate benchmark reform.
In the current year, the Group adopted the Phase 2 amendments Interest Rate Benchmark Reform—Amendments 
to IFRS 9, IAS 39, IFRS 7, IFRS 4 and IFRS 16. Adopting these amendments enables the Group to reflect the effects of transitioning from interbank offered rates (IBOR) to alternative benchmark interest rates (also referred to as ‘risk free rates’ or RFRs) without giving rise to accounting impacts that would not provide useful information to 
users of financial statements. The Group has not restated the prior period. 
Both the Phase 1 and Phase 2 amendments did not have an impact on the Group. 
2.1.2 Impact of the initial application of COVID-19-Related Rent Concessions beyond 30 June 
2021—Amendment to IFRS 16
In the prior year, the Group early adopted Covid-19-Related Rent Concessions (Amendment to IFRS 16) that provided 
practical relief to lessees in accounting for rent concessions occurring as a direct consequence of COVID-19, by introducing a practical expedient to IFRS 16. This practical expedient was available to rent concessions for which 
any reduction in lease payments affected payments originally due on or before 30 June 2021. This amendment 
did not have a material impact on the Group.
In March 2021, the Board issued Covid-19-Related Rent Concessions beyond 30 June 2021 (Amendment to IFRS 16) 
that extends the practical expedient to apply to reduction in lease payments originally due on or before 30 June 2022.
In the current financial year, the Group has not applied the amendment to IFRS 16 (as issued by the Board in 
May 2021).
The practical expedient permits a lessee to elect not to assess whether a COVID-19-related rent concession is a 
lease modification. A lessee that makes this election shall account for any change in lease payments resulting from the COVID-19-related rent concession applying IFRS 16 as if the change were not a lease modification.
The practical expedient applies only to rent concessions occurring as a direct consequence of COVID-19 and 
only if all of the following conditions are met:
• The change in lease payments results in revised consideration for the lease that is substantially the same as, 
or less than, the consideration for the lease immediately preceding the change
• Any reduction in lease payments affects only payments originally due on or before 30 June 2022 (a rent concession meets this condition if it results in reduced lease payments on or before 30 June 2022 and increased lease payments that extend beyond 30 June 2022).
• There is no substantive change to other terms and conditions of the lease.Notes to the Financial StatementsGCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202170
2.2.  Standards issued but not yet effective 
At the date of authorisation of these financial statements, the Group has not applied the following new and 
revised IFRS Standards that have been issued but are not yet effective.
These standards issued but not yet effective are not expected to have a material impact on future financial 
position and performance to the Group.
2.2.1.  IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts
IFRS 17 establishes the principles for the recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of insurance contracts and supersedes IFRS 4 Insurance Contracts.
IFRS 17 outlines a general model, which is modified for insurance contracts with direct participation features, 
described as the variable fee approach. The general model is simplified if certain criteria are met by measuring the liability for remaining coverage using the premium allocation approach.
The general model uses current assumptions to estimate the amount, timing and uncertainty of future cash 
flows and it explicitly measures the cost of that uncertainty. It takes into account market interest rates and the impact of policyholders’ options and guarantees.
In June 2020, the Board issued Amendments to IFRS 17 to address concerns and implementation challenges that 
were identified after IFRS 17 was published. The amendments defer the date of initial application of IFRS 17 
(incorporating the amendments) to annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023. At the same time, the Board issued Extension of the Temporary Exemption from Applying IFRS 9 (Amendments to IFRS 4) that 
extends the fixed expiry date of the temporary exemption from applying IFRS 9 in IFRS 4 to annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023.
IFRS 17 must be applied retrospectively unless impracticable, in which case the modified retrospective approach 
or the fair value approach is applied. For the purpose of the transition requirements, the date of initial application is the start of the annual reporting period in which the entity first applies the Standard, and the transition date is the beginning of the period immediately preceding the date of initial application.
2.2.1  Amendments to IFRS 10 Consolidated Financial Statements and IAS 28 Investments in 
Associates and Joint 
Ventures—Sale or Contribution of Assets between an Investor and its Associate or Joint Venture
The amendments to IFRS 10 and IAS 28 deal with situations where there is a sale or contribution of assets 
between an investor and its associate or joint venture. Specifically, the amendments state that gains or losses resulting from the loss of control of a subsidiary that does not contain a business in a transaction with an 
associate or a joint venture that is accounted for using the equity method, are recognised in the parent’s profit 
or loss only to the extent of the unrelated investors’ interests in that associate or joint venture. Similarly, gains and losses resulting from the remeasurement of investments retained in any former subsidiary (that has become an associate or a joint venture that is accounted for using the equity method) to fair value are recognised in the former parent’s profit or loss only to the extent of the unrelated investors’ interests in the new associate or joint venture. The effective date of the amendments has yet to be set by the Board; however, earlier application of 
the amendments is permitted. The directors of the Group anticipate that the application of these amendments 
may have an impact on The Group consolidated financial statements in future periods should such transactions arise.
2.2.2  Amendments to IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements—Classification of Liabilities as 
Current or Noncurrent
The amendments to IAS 1 affect only the presentation of liabilities as current or non-current in the statement of financial position and not the amount or timing of recognition of any asset, liability, income or expenses, or the information disclosed about those items. The amendments clarify that the classification of liabilities as current 
or non-current is based on rights that are in existence at the end of the reporting period, specify that classification Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 71
is unaffected by expectations about whether an entity will exercise its right to defer settlement of a liability, 
explain that rights are in existence if covenants are complied with at the end of the reporting period, and introduce a definition of ‘settlement’ to make clear that settlement refers to the transfer to the counterparty of 
cash, equity instruments, other assets or services.
The amendments are applied retrospectively for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023, with early 
application permitted
2.2.3   Amendments to IFRS 3 Business Combinations—Reference to the Conceptual Framework
The amendments update IFRS 3 so that it refers to the 2018 Conceptual Framework instead of the 1989 Framework. 
They also add to IFRS 3 a requirement that, for obligations within the scope of IAS 37, an acquirer applies IAS 37 to determine whether at the acquisition date a present obligation exists as a result of past events. For a levy that 
would be within the scope of IFRIC 21 Levies , the acquirer applies IFRIC 21 to determine whether the obligating 
event that gives rise to a liability to pay the levy has occurred by the acquisition date.
Finally, the amendments add an explicit statement that an acquirer does not recognise contingent assets 
acquired in a business combination.
The amendments are effective for business combinations for which the date of acquisition is on or after the 
beginning of the first annual period beginning on or after 1 January 2022. Early application is permitted if an entity also applies all other updated references (published together with the updated Conceptual Framework ) at 
the same time or earlier. 
2.2.4   Amendments to IAS 16 Property, Plant and Equipment—Proceeds before Intended Use
The amendments prohibit deducting from the cost of an item of property, plant and equipment any proceeds from selling items produced before that asset is available for use, i.e. proceeds while bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management. 
Consequently, an entity recognises such sales proceeds and related costs in profit or loss. The entity measures 
the cost of those items in accordance with IAS 2 Inventories.
The amendments also clarify the meaning of ‘testing whether an asset is functioning properly’. IAS 16 now 
specifies this as assessing whether the technical and physical performance of the asset is such that it is capable of being used in the production or supply of goods or services, for rental to others, or for administrative 
purposes. If not presented separately in the statement of comprehensive income, the financial statements shall 
disclose the amounts of proceeds and cost included in profit or loss that relate to items produced that are not an output of the entity’s ordinary activities, and which line item(s) in the statement of  comprehensive income include(s) such proceeds and cost.
The amendments are applied retrospectively, but only to items of property, plant and equipment that are 
brought to the location and condition necessary for them to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management on or after the beginning of the earliest period presented in the financial statements in which the 
entity first applies the amendments.
The entity shall recognise the cumulative effect of initially applying the amendments as an adjustment to the 
opening balance of retained earnings (or other component of equity, as appropriate) at the beginning of that 
earliest period presented.
The amendments are effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022, with early application 
permitted.
2.2.5   Amendments to IAS 37 Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets—Onerous 
Contracts—Cost of   Fulfilling a Contract
The amendments specify that the ‘cost of fulfilling’ a contract comprises the ‘costs that relate directly to the 
contract’. Costs that relate directly to a contract consist of both the incremental costs of fulfilling that contract (examples would be direct labour or materials) and an allocation of other costs that relate directly to fulfilling 
contracts (an example would be the allocation of the depreciation charge for an item of property, plant and 
equipment used in fulfilling the contract).
The amendments apply to contracts for which the entity has not yet fulfilled all its obligations at the beginning GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202172
of the annual reporting period in which the entity first applies the amendments. Comparatives are not restated. 
Instead, the entity shall recognise the cumulative effect of initially applying the amendments as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings or other component of equity, as appropriate, at the date of initial 
application.
The amendments are effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022, with early application 
permitted.
2.2.6  Annual Improvements to IFRS Standards 2018-2020—Amendments to IFRS 1 First-time 
Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards, IFRS 9 Financial Instruments, IFRS 16 Leases, and IAS 41 Agriculture
The Annual Improvements include amendments to four Standards:
The amendment provides additional relief to a subsidiary which becomes a first-time adopter later than its 
parent in respect of accounting for cumulative translation differences. As a result of the amendment, a subsidiary that uses the exemption in IFRS 1:D16(a) can now also elect to measure cumulative translation differences for all 
foreign operations at the carrying amount that would be included in the parent’s consolidated financial 
statements, based on the parent’s date of transition to IFRS Standards, if no adjustments were made for consolidation procedures and for the effects of the business combination in which the parent acquired the subsidiary. A similar election is available to an associate or joint venture that uses the exemption in IFRS 1:D16(a).
The amendment is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022, with early application 
permitted.
IFRS 9  Financial Instruments
The amendment clarifies that in applying the ‘10 per cent’ test to assess whether to derecognise a financial 
liability, an entity includes only fees paid or received between the entity (the borrower) and the lender, including fees paid or received by either the entity or the lender on the other’s behalf.
The amendment is applied prospectively to modifications and exchanges that occur on or after the date the 
entity first applies the amendment.
The amendment is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022, with early application 
permitted.
IFRS 16 LeasesThe amendment removes the illustration of the reimbursement of leasehold improvements. As the amendment 
to IFRS 16 only regards an illustrative example, no effective date is stated.
IAS 41  Agriculture
The amendment removes the requirement in IAS 41 for entities to exclude cash flows for taxation when 
measuring fair value. This aligns the fair value measurement in IAS 41 with the requirements of IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement to use internally consistent cash flows and discount rates and enables preparers to determine 
whether to use pretax or post-tax cash flows and discount rates for the most appropriate fair value measurement.
The amendment is applied prospectively, i.e. for fair value measurements on or after the date an entity initially 
applies the amendment.
The amendment is effective for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022, with earlier 
application permittedNotes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 73
2.2.7   Amendments to IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements and IFRS Practice Statement 
2 Making Materiality Judgements—Disclosure of Accounting Policies
The amendments change the requirements in IAS 1 with regard to disclosure of accounting policies. The 
amendments replace all instances of the term ‘significant accounting policies’ with ‘material accounting policy information’. Accounting policy information is material if, when considered together with other information 
included in an entity’s financial statements, it can reasonably be expected to influence decisions that the 
primary users of general purpose financial statements make on the basis of those financial statements.
The supporting paragraphs in IAS 1 are also amended to clarify that accounting policy information that relates 
to immaterial transactions, other events or conditions is immaterial and need not be disclosed. Accounting 
policy information may be material because of the nature of the related transactions, other events or conditions, 
even if the amounts are immaterial. However, not all accounting policy information relating to material transactions, other events or conditions is itself material.
The Board has also developed guidance and examples to explain and demonstrate the application of the ‘four-
step materiality process’ described in IFRS Practice Statement 2.
The amendments to IAS 1 are effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023, with earlier 
application permitted and are applied prospectively. The amendments to IFRS Practice Statement 2 do not contain an effective date or transition requirements.
2.2.8   Amendments to IAS 8 Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors—
Definition of Accounting Estimates
The amendments replace the definition of a change in accounting estimates with a definition of accounting estimates. Under the new definition, accounting estimates are “monetary amounts in financial statements that are subject to measurement uncertainty”.
The definition of a change in accounting estimates was deleted. However, the Board retained the concept of 
changes in accounting estimates in the Standard with the following clarifications:
• A change in accounting estimate that results from new information or new developments is not the correction 
of an error
• The effects of a change in an input or a measurement technique used to develop an accounting estimate are changes in accounting estimates if they do not result from the correction of prior period errors 
The Board added two examples (Examples 4-5) to the Guidance on implementing IAS 8, which accompanies the Standard. The Board has deleted one example (Example 3) as it could cause confusion in light of the amendments.
The amendments are effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023 to changes in accounting 
policies and changes in accounting estimates that occur on or after the beginning of that period, with earlier application permitted.
2.2.9  Amendments to IAS 12 Income Taxes—Deferred Tax related to Assets and Liabilities arising 
from a Single Transaction
The amendments introduce a further exception from the initial recognition exemption. Under the amendments, an entity does not apply the initial recognition exemption for transactions that give rise to equal taxable and deductible temporary differences.
Depending on the applicable tax law, equal taxable and deductible temporary differences may arise on initial 
recognition of an asset and liability in a transaction that is not a business combination and affects neither 
accounting nor taxable profit. For example, this may arise upon recognition of a lease liability and the corresponding right-of-use asset applying IFRS 16 at the commencement date of a lease.
Following the amendments to IAS 12, an entity is required to recognise the related deferred tax asset and 
liability, with the recognition of any deferred tax asset being subject to the recoverability criteria in IAS 12.
The Board also added an illustrative example to IAS 12 that explains how the amendments are applied.The amendments apply to transactions that occur on or after the beginning of the earliest comparative period 
presented. In addition, at the beginning of the earliest comparative period an entity recognises:GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202174
• A deferred tax asset (to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the 
deductible temporary difference can be utilised) and a deferred tax liability for all deductible and taxable temporary differences associated with:
–
 Right-of-use assets and lease liabilities
– Decommissioning, restoration and similar liabilities and the corresponding amounts recognised as part of the cost of the related asset
• The cumulative effect of initially applying the amendments as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings (or other component of equity, as appropriate) at that date 
The amendments are effective for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023, with earlier application permitted
3. Basis of preparation
3.1.  Statement of compliance
The consolidated and separate financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS as issued by the IASB”) and in the manner required by the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992), and the Banks and Specialised DepositTaking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).
3.2.  Basis of measurement
The financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis, except for the following material items, which are measured at fair value:
• financial assets measured at fair value and,
• defined benefit obligations measured at the present value of the defined benefit obligation.
Historical cost is generally based on the fair value of the consideration given in exchange for goods and services.
The Group’s accounting policy on fair value is set out in note 7.
3.3.  Functional and presentation currency
The financial statements are presented in Ghana Cedis, which is the Bank’s functional currency. All financial 
information presented in Ghana Cedis have been rounded to the nearest thousands, except when otherwise indicated.
3.4.  Presentation of financial statements
The Group presents its statement of financial position in order of liquidity based on the Group’s intention and perceived ability to recover/settle the majority of assets/liabilities of the corresponding financial statement line item. An analysis regarding recovery or settlement within 12 months after the reporting date (current) and more 
than 12 months after the reporting date (non–current) is presented under a note item where applicable.
Financial assets and financial liabilities are generally reported gross in the consolidated and separate statements 
of financial position except when IFRS netting criteria are met.
4.  Summary of significant accounting policies
The accounting policies set out below have been applied consistently to all the periods presented in these financial statements and have been applied consistently by Group entities.
4.1.  Basis of consolidation
The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the Bank and entity controlled by the Bank (its subsidiary) made up to 31 December each year. Control is achieved when the Group:
• has the power over the investee;Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 75
• is exposed, or has rights, to variable returns from its involvement with the investee; and
• has the ability to use its power to affects its returns. 
The Company reassesses whether or not it controls an investee if facts and circumstances indicate that there 
are changes to one or more of the three elements of control listed above. 
i. SubsidiaryThe subsidiary is an investee controlled by the Group. The financial statements of the subsidiary are included in 
the consolidated financial statements from the date on which control commences until the date when control 
ceases. The financial statements of the subsidiary used to prepare the consolidated financial statements were 
prepared as of the Bank’s reporting date. The subsidiary’s financial statements are prepared in accordance with Group accounting policies.
There were no non-controlling interests in the subsidiary.ii. Transactions eliminated on consolidationIntra Group balances and transactions and any unrealised income and expenses (except foreign currency 
transaction gains or losses) arising from intra Group transactions, are eliminated in preparing the consolidated financial statements. Unrealised losses are eliminated in the same way as unrealised gains, but only to the extent that there is no evidence of impairment.
iii. Associates
Associates are all entities over which the Bank has significant influence but not control, generally accompanying 
a shareholding of between 20% and 50% of voting rights. Investment in associates are accounted for using the equity method of accounting and are initially recognised at cost.
iv. Change in ownership interest of a subsidiary
A change in ownership interest of a subsidiary, without loss of control, is accounted for as an equity transaction. 
The carrying amount of the Group’s interests and any non-controlling interests are adjusted to reflect the changes in their relative interests in the subsidiaries. If the Group loses control over a subsidiary, it derecognises the assets and liabilities of the subsidiary, any related noncontrolling interests and other components of equity. Any surplus or deficit arising on the loss of control is recognised in profit or loss. Any retained interest in the former subsidiary is recognised at fair value at the date of loss of control. 
v. Separate financial statements
In the separate financial statements, investments in the subsidiary and associates are accounted for at cost less 
impairment. Cost also includes direct attributable costs of investment.
4.2.  Foreign currency  
4.2.1.  Foreign currency transactions
Transactions in foreign currencies (currencies other than the entity’s functional currency) are translated into the 
respective functional currency of the Group entities using exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the reporting date are translated to the 
functional currency at exchange rates ruling at that date. Nonmonetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are not retranslated.
Foreign currency differences arising on retranslation are generally recognised in profit or loss.Foreign exchange gains and losses arising from the translation of items recognised in other comprehensive 
income are presented in other comprehensive income.
4.2.2  Foreign operations
The assets and liabilities of foreign operations are translated into Ghana Cedis at the spot exchange rates at the reporting date. The income and expenses of foreign operations are translated into Ghana Cedis at the average exchange rates for the period. GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202176
Foreign currency differences arising on the translation are recognised in other comprehensive income and 
presented within equity.
When a foreign operation is disposed of, the cumulative amount in equity relating to that foreign operation is 
reclassified to profit or loss as part of the gain or loss on disposal.
Exchange differences are recognised in profit or loss in the period in which they arise except for:
• exchange differences on foreign currency borrowings relating to assets under construction for future 
productive use, which are included in the cost of those assets when they are regarded as an adjustment to interest costs on those foreign currency borrowings;
• exchange differences on transactions entered into to hedge certain foreign currency risks and
• exchange differences on monetary items receivable from or payable to a foreign operation for which settlement is neither planned nor likely to occur in the foreseeable future (therefore forming part of the net investment in the foreign operation), which are recognised initially in other comprehensive income and 
reclassified from equity to profit or loss on disposal or partial disposal of the net investment.
For the purpose of presenting consolidated financial statements, the assets and liabilities of the Group’s foreign operations are translated at exchange rates prevailing on the reporting date. Income and expense items are 
translated at the average exchange rates for the period, unless exchange rates fluctuate significantly during that period, in which case the exchange rates at the date of transactions are used. Exchange differences arising, if any, are recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in a foreign exchange translation reserve.
On the disposal of a foreign operation (i.e. a disposal of the Group’s entire interest in a foreign operation, or a 
disposal involving loss of control over a subsidiary that includes a foreign operation or a partial disposal of an 
interest in a joint arrangement or an associate that includes a foreign operation of which the retained interest becomes a financial asset), all of the exchange differences accumulated in a foreign exchange translation reserve in respect of that operation attributable to the owners of the Group are reclassified to profit or loss.
In addition, in relation to a partial disposal of a subsidiary that includes a foreign operation that does not result 
in the Group losing control over the subsidiary, the proportionate share of accumulated exchange differences are re-attributed to non-controlling interests and are not recognised in profit or loss. For all other partial disposals 
(i.e. partial disposals of associates or joint arrangements that do not result in the Group losing significant 
influence or joint control), the proportionate share of the accumulated exchange differences is reclassified to profit or loss. 
4.3.  Revenue recognition  
The Group recognises revenue from the following major sources:
•  Interest income on cash & short-term loans, investment securities and loans and advances
•  Fee and commission income 
•  Net trading income 
Revenue is measured based on the consideration to which the Group expects to be entitled in a contract with a customer and excludes amounts collected on behalf of third parties. The Group recognises revenue when it transfers control of a product or service to a customer.
4.3.1  Recognition of interest income
The effective interest rate method (EIR)
Under IFRS 9, interest income is recorded using the EIR method for all financial assets measured at amortised 
cost. Interest income on interest bearing financial assets measured at FVTOCI under IFRS 9 is also recorded using the EIR method. Interest expense is also calculated using the EIR method for all financial liabilities held at amortised cost. The EIR is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash receipts through the expected Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 77
life of the financial asset or liability or, when appropriate, a shorter period, to the gross carrying amount of the 
financial asset.
The EIR (and therefore, the amortised cost of the financial asset) is calculated by taking into account transaction 
costs and any discount or premium on the acquisition of the financial asset, as well as fees and costs that are an integral part of the EIR. The Bank recognises interest income using a rate of return that represents the best estimate of a constant rate of return over the expected life of the loan. 
Expectations of fixed rate financial assets’ or liabilities’ cash flows are revised for reasons other than credit risk, 
then changes to future contractual cash flows are discounted at the original EIR with a consequential adjustment 
to the carrying amount. The difference from the previous carrying amount is booked as a positive or negative 
adjustment to the carrying amount of the financial asset or liability on the statement of financial position with a corresponding increase or decrease in interest revenue/expense calculated using the effective interest method.
For floating-rate financial instruments, periodic re-estimation of cash flows to reflect the movements in the 
market rates of interest also alters the effective interest rate, but when instruments were initially recognised at 
an amount equal to the principal, re-estimating the future interest payments does not significantly affect the 
carrying amount of the asset or the liability.
Interest and similar income/expense
Net interest income comprises interest income and interest expense calculated using both the effective interest 
method and other methods. These are disclosed separately on the face of the income statement for both 
interest income and interest expense to provide symmetrical and comparable information.
In its Interest income/expense calculated using the effective interest method, the Group only includes interest 
on those financial instruments that are set out in Note 4.4.
Interest income/expense on all trading financial assets/liabilities is recognised as a part of the fair value change 
in ‘Net trading income’.
The Group calculates interest income on financial assets, other than those considered credit-impaired, by 
applying the EIR to the gross carrying amount of the financial asset.
4.3.1  Recognition of interest income
When a financial asset becomes credit-impaired, as set out in Note 4.10 and is therefore regarded as ‘Stage 3’, 
the Group suspends interest that would have accrued had the Group applied the EIR. If the financial asset cures (as outlined in Note 4.10) and is no longer credit-impaired, the Bank releases suspended interest into interest 
income.
For purchased or originated credit-impaired (POCI) financial assets (as set out in Note 4.10), the Group calculates 
interest income by calculating the credit-adjusted EIR and applying that rate to the amortised cost of the financial asset. The credit-adjusted EIR is the interest rate that, at initial recognition, discounts the estimated future cash flows (including credit losses) to the amortised cost of the POCI financial asset.
4.3.2  Fee and commission income and expense
Fee and commission income and expense include fees other than those that are an integral part of EIR. Fees included is earned on related services such as routine bank transaction for customers. Other fees and commission income and expenses are recognised on an accrual basis when the related services are performed. Loan 
commitment fees for loans that are not likely to be drawn down are deferred, together with related direct costs 
and recognised on a straight line basis over the commitment period.
Other fees included in this part of the Group’s consolidated statement of profit or loss include fees charged for 
servicing a loan, nonutilisation fees relating to loan commitments when it is unlikely that these will result in a specific lending arrangement and loan syndication fees.
Other fees and commission expenses, which relate mainly to transaction and service fees are expensed as the 
related services are performed.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202178
4.3.3  Net trading income
Net trading income comprises gains less losses related to foreign exchange differences on foreign currency deal 
transactions as well as all realised and unrealised fair value changes related to held-for-trading investment securities. The Group has elected to present the full fair value movement of trading assets and liabilities in 
trading income, including any related expense.
4.4.  Financial instruments 
4.4.1  Initial recognition
4.4.1.1  Date of recognition
Financial assets and liabilities, with the exception of loans and advances to customers and balances due to 
customers, are initially recognised on the trade date, i.e., the date on which the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument. This includes regular way trades, i.e., purchases or sales of financial 
assets that require delivery of assets within the time frame generally established by regulation or convention in 
the market place. Loans and advances to customers are recognised when funds are transferred to the customers’ accounts. The Group recognises balances due to customers when funds are transferred to the Group.
4.4.1.2  Initial measurement of financial instruments
The classification of financial instruments at initial recognition depends on their contractual terms and the business model for managing the instruments, as described in Notes 4.7. Financial instruments are initially measured at their fair value (as defined in Note 4.6), except in the case of financial assets and financial liabilities 
recorded at FVTPL, transaction costs are added to, or subtracted from, this amount. Trade receivables are 
measured at the transaction price. When the fair value of financial instruments at initial recognition differs from the transaction price, the Group accounts for the Day 1 profit or loss, as described below.
4.4.1.3  Day 1 profit or loss
When the transaction price of the instrument differs from the fair value at origination and the fair value is based on a valuation technique using only inputs observable in market transactions, the Group recognises the difference between the transaction price and fair value in net trading income. In those cases where fair value is 
based on models for which some of the inputs are not observable, the difference between the transaction price 
and the fair value is deferred and is only recognised in profit or loss when the inputs become observable, or when the instrument is derecognised.
4.5  Measurement categories of financial assets and liabilities
The Group classifies all of its financial assets based on the business model for managing the assets and the asset’s contractual terms (as explained in 4.7), measured at either:
• Amortised cost
• Fair value through other comprehensive income (FVTOCI)
• Fair value through profit and loss (FVTPL)
4.5.1  Initial recognition
The Group classifies and measures its derivative and trading portfolio at FVTPL, as explained in Notes 4.7.2 and 4.7.3. The Group may designate financial instruments at FVTPL, if so doing eliminates or significantly reduces measurement or recognition inconsistencies, as explained in Note 4.7.2. Financial liabilities, other than loan 
commitments and financial guarantees, are measured at amortised cost or at FVTPL when they are held for 
trading and derivative instruments or the fair value designation is applied, as explained in Notes 4.7.1 and 4.7.2
4.6 Determination of fair value
In order to show how fair values have been derived, financial instruments are classified based on a hierarchy of valuation techniques, as summarised below:Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 79
• Level 1 financial instruments − These are where the inputs used in the valuation are unadjusted quoted prices 
from active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the Group has access to at the measurement date. The Group considers markets as active only if there are sufficient trading activities with regards to the volume 
and liquidity of the identical assets or liabilities and when there are binding and exercisable price quotes 
available on the balance sheet date.
• Level 2 financial instruments − These are where the inputs that are used for valuation are significant,and are derived from directly or indirectly observable market data available over the entire period of the instrument’s life. Such inputs include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for 
identical instruments in inactive markets and observable inputs other than quoted prices such as interest 
rates and yield curves, implied volatilities, and credit spreads. In addition, adjustments may be required for the condition or location of the asset or the extent to which it relates to items that are comparable to the valued instrument. However, if such adjustments are based on unobservable inputs which are significant to the entire measurement, the Group will classify the instruments as Level 3.
• Level 3 financial instruments − These include one or more unobservable input that is significant to the measurement as whole.
The Group periodically reviews its valuation techniques including the adopted methodologies and model calibrations. However, the base models may not fully capture all factors relevant to the valuation of the Group’s 
financial instruments such as credit risk (CVA), own credit (DVA) and/or funding costs (FVA). Therefore, the 
Group applies various techniques to estimate the credit risk associated with its financial instruments measured at fair value, which include a portfolio-based approach that estimates the expected net exposure per counterparty over the full lifetime of the individual assets, in order to reflect the credit risk of the individual counterparties 
for non-collateralised financial instruments. The Group estimates the value of its own credit from market 
observable data, such as secondary prices for its traded debt and the credit spread on credit default swaps and traded debts on itself. 
The Group evaluates the levelling at each reporting period on an instrument-by-instrument basis and reclassifies 
instruments when necessary, based on the facts at the end of the reporting period.
4.7  Financial assets and liabilities
4.7.1  Advances to banks, Loans and advances to customers, Financial investments at amortised 
cost
The Group measures Advances to banks, Loans and advances to customers and other financial investments at 
amortised cost only if both of the following conditions are met:
• The financial asset is held within a business model with the objective to hold financial assets in order to collect contractual cash flows
• The contractual terms of the financial asset give rise on specified dates to cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest (SPPI) on the principal amount outstanding.
The details of these conditions are outlined below.
4.7.1.1  Business model assessment
The Group determines its business model at the level that best reflects how it manages groups of financial assets to achieve its business objective:
• The risks that affect the performance of the business model (and the financial assets held within that business model) and, in particular, the way those risks are managed;
• How managers of the business are compensated (for example, whether the compensation is based on the fair value of the assets managed or on the contractual cash flows collected).
The expected frequency, value and timing of sales are also important aspects of the Group’s assessment. The business model assessment is based on reasonably expected scenarios without taking ‘worst case’ or ‘stress 
case’ scenarios into account. If cash flows after initial recognition are realised in a way that is different from the 
Group’s original expectations, the Group does not change the classification of the remaining financial assets held in that business model, but incorporates such information when assessing newly originated or newly purchased financial assets going forward.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202180
4.7.1.2  The SPPI test 
As a second step of its classification process, the Group assesses the contractual terms of the financial asset to 
identify whether they meet the SPPI test. ‘Principal’ for the purpose of this test is defined as the fair value of the financial asset at initial recognition and may change over the life of the financial asset (for example, if there are 
repayments of principal or amortisation of the premium/discount).The most significant elements of interest 
within a lending arrangement are typically the consideration for the time value of money and credit risk. To make the SPPI assessment, the Group applies judgement and considers relevant factors such as the currency in which the financial asset is denominated, and the period for which the interest rate is set.
In contrast, contractual terms that introduce a more than de minimis  exposure to risks or volatility in the 
contractual cash flows that are unrelated to a basic lending arrangement do not give rise to contractual cash 
flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the amount outstanding. In such cases, the financial 
asset is required to be measured at FVTPL.
4.7.2  Financial assets or financial liabilities held for trading
The Group classifies financial assets or financial liabilities as held for trading when they have been purchased or 
issued primarily for short-term profit-making through trading activities or form part of a portfolio of financial instruments that are managed together, for which there is evidence of a recent pattern of short-term profit 
taking. Held-for-trading assets and liabilities are recorded and measured in the statement of financial position 
at fair value. Changes in fair value are recognised in net trading income. Interest and dividend income or expense is recorded in net trading income according to the terms of the contract, or when the right to payment has been established.
Included in this classification are debt securities, equities, short positions and customer loans that have been 
acquired principally for the purpose of selling or repurchasing in the near term.
4.7.3  Debt instruments at FVTOCI
The Group classifies debt instruments at FVTOCI when both of the following conditions are met:
• The instrument is held within a business model, the objective of which is achieved by both collecting 
contractual cash flows and selling financial assets; and
• The contractual terms of the financial asset meet the SPPI test.
FVTOCI debt instruments are subsequently measured at fair value with gains and losses arising due to changes in fair value recognised in OCI. Interest income and foreign exchange gains and losses are recognised in profit or loss in the same manner as for financial assets measured at amortised cost as explained in Note 4.3.1. The 
ECL calculation for Debt instruments at FVTOCI is explained in Note 4.10.1. Where the Group holds more than 
one investment in the same security, they are deemed to be disposed of on a first–in first–out basis. On derecognition, cumulative gains or losses previously recognised in OCI are reclassified from OCI to profit or loss.
4.7.5  Equity instruments at FVTOCI
Upon initial recognition, the Group occasionally elects to classify irrevocably some of its equity investments as equity instruments at FVTOCI when they meet the definition of Equity under IAS 32 Financial Instruments: Presentation  and are not held for trading. Such classification is determined on an instrument-by instrument 
basis.
Gains and losses on these equity instruments are never recycled to profit. Dividends are recognised in profit or 
loss as other operating income when the right of the payment has been established, except when the Group benefits from such proceeds as a recovery of part of the cost of the instrument, in which case, such gains are recorded in OCI. Equity instruments at FVTOCI are not subject to an impairment assessment.
4.7.6  Financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss
Financial assets and financial liabilities in this category are those that are not held for trading and have been Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 81
either designated by management upon initial recognition or are mandatorily required to be measured at fair 
value under IFRS 9. Management only designates an instrument at FVTPL upon initial recognition when one of the following criteria are met. Such designation is determined on an instrument-by-instrument basis:
• The designation eliminates, or significantly reduces, the inconsistent treatment that would otherwise arise from measuring the assets or liabilities or recognising gains or losses on them on a different basis
Or
• The liabilities are part of a group of financial liabilities, which are managed and their performance evaluated on a fair value basis, in accordance with a documented risk management or investment strategy
Or
• The liabilities contain one or more embedded derivatives, unless they do not significantly modify the cash flows that would otherwise be required by the contract, or it is clear with little or no analysis when a similar instrument is first considered that separation of the embedded derivative(s) is prohibited.
Financial assets and financial liabilities at FVTPL are recorded in the statement of financial position at fair value. 
Changes in fair value are recorded in profit and loss with the exception of movements in fair value of liabilities 
designated at FVTPL due to changes in the Group’s own credit risk. Such changes in fair value are recorded in the Own credit reserve through OCI and do not get recycled to the profit or loss. Interest earned or incurred on instruments designated at FVTPL is accrued in interest income or interest expense, respectively, using the EIR, taking into account any discount/ premium and qualifying transaction costs being an integral part of instrument. Interest earned on assets mandatorily required to be measured at FVTPL is recorded using the contractual interest rate, as explained in Note 4.3.1. Dividend income from equity instruments measured at FVTPL is 
recorded in profit or loss as other operating income when the right to the payment has been established.
4.7.7  Financial guarantees, letters of credit and undrawn loan commitments
The Group issues financial guarantees, letters of credit and loan commitments.
Financial guarantees are initially recognised in the financial statements (within Provisions) at fair value, being 
the premium received. Subsequent to initial recognition, the Group’s liability under each guarantee is measured 
at the higher of the amount initially recognised less cumulative amortisation recognised in the income statement, 
and an ECL allowance.
The premium received is recognised in the income statement in Net fees and commission income on a straight 
line basis over the life of the guarantee.
Undrawn loan commitments and letters of credits are commitments under which, over the duration of the 
commitment, the Bank is required to provide a loan with pre-specified terms to the customer. Similar to financial 
guarantee contracts, these contracts are in the scope of the ECL requirements.
The nominal contractual value of financial guarantees, letters of credit and undrawn loan commitments, where 
the loan agreed to be provided is on market terms, are not recorded on in the statement of financial position. 
The Group occasionally issues loan commitments at below market interest rates. Such commitments are 
subsequently measured at the higher of the amount of the ECL allowance (as explained in Note 4.10.1) and the 
amount initially recognised less, when appropriate, the cumulative amount of income recognised as outlined in 
Note 11.
4.8  Reclassification of financial assets and liabilities
The Group does not reclassify its financial assets subsequent to their initial recognition, apart from the exceptional circumstances in which the Group acquires, disposes of, or terminates a business line. Financial liabilities are never reclassified.
4.9  Derecognition of financial assets and liabilities
4.9.1  Derecognition due to substantial modification of terms and conditions
The Group derecognises a financial asset, such as a loan to a customer, when the terms and conditions have 
been renegotiated to the extent that, substantially, it becomes a new loan, with the difference recognised as a derecognition gain or loss, to the extent that an impairment loss has not already been recorded. The newly GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202182
recognised loans are classified as Stage 1 for ECL measurement purposes, unless the new loan is deemed to be 
POCI.
When assessing whether or not to derecognise a loan to a customer, amongst others, the Group considers the 
following factors:
• Change in currency of the loan
• Introduction of an equity feature
• Change in counterparty
• If the modification is such that the instrument would no longer meet the SPPI criterion
If the modification does not result in cash flows that are substantially different, as set out below, the modification does not result in de-recognition. Based on the change in cash flows discounted at the original EIR, the Group records a modification gain or loss, to the extent that an impairment loss has not already been recorded. For 
financial liabilities, the Group considers a modification substantial based on qualitative factors and if it results in 
a difference between the adjusted discounted present value and the original carrying amount of the financial liability of, or greater than, ten percent. For financial assets, this assessment is based on qualitative factors.
4.9.2  De-recognition other than for substantial modification
4.9.2.1  Financial assets
A financial asset (or, where applicable, a part of a financial asset or part of a group of similar financial assets) is 
derecognised when the rights to receive cash flows from the financial asset have expired. The Group also derecognises the financial asset if it has both transferred the financial asset and the transfer qualifies for de-
recognition.
The Group has transferred the financial asset if, and only if, either:
• The Group has transferred its contractual rights to receive cash flows from the financial asset
Or
• It retains the rights to the cash flows, but has assumed an obligation to pay the received cash flows in full 
without material delay to a third party under a ‘pass–through’ arrangement.
4.9.2.1  Financial assets
Pass-through arrangements are transactions whereby the Group retains the contractual rights to receive the cash flows of a financial asset (the ‘original asset’), but assumes a contractual obligation to pay those cash flows to one or more entities (the ‘eventual recipients’), when all of the following three conditions are met:
The Group has no obligation to pay amounts to the eventual recipients unless it has collected equivalent 
amounts from the original asset, excluding short-term advances with the right to full recovery of the amount lent plus accrued interest at market rates;
The Group cannot sell or pledge the original asset other than as security to the eventual recipients; and
The Group has to remit any cash flows it collects on behalf of the eventual recipients without material delay. In 
addition, the Bank is not entitled to reinvest such cash flows, except for investments in cash or cash equivalents, including interest earned, during the period between the collection date and the date of required remittance to the eventual recipients.
A transfer only qualifies for derecognition if either:
• The Group has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset
Or
• The Group has neither transferred nor retained substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset, but has 
transferred control of the asset.Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 83
The Group considers control to be transferred if and only if, the transferee has the practical ability to sell the 
asset in its entirety to an unrelated third party and is able to exercise that ability unilaterally and without imposing additional restrictions on the transfer.
When the Group has neither transferred nor retained substantially all the risks and rewards and has retained 
control of the asset, the asset continues to be recognised only to the extent of the Group’s continuing involvement, in which case, the Group also recognises an associated liability. The transferred asset and the associated liability are measured on a basis that reflects the rights and obligations that the Group has retained.
Continuing involvement that takes the form of a guarantee over the transferred asset is measured at the lower 
of the original carrying amount of the asset and the maximum amount of consideration the Group could be 
required to pay.
If continuing involvement takes the form of a written or purchased option (or both) on the transferred asset, the 
continuing involvement is measured at the value the Group would be required to pay upon repurchase. In the case of a written put option on an asset that is measured at fair value, the extent of the entity’s continuing involvement is limited to the lower of the fair value of the transferred asset and the option exercise price.
4.9.2.2  Financial liabilities
A financial liability is derecognised when the obligation under the liability is discharged, cancelled or expires. Where an existing financial liability is replaced by another from the same lender on substantially different terms, or the terms of an existing liability are substantially modified, such an exchange or modification is treated as a 
de-recognition of the original liability and the recognition of a new liability. The difference between the carrying 
value of the original financial liability and the consideration paid is recognised in profit or loss.
4.10  Overview of the ECL principles
The Group records an allowance for expected credit loss for all loans and other debt financial assets not held at FVTPL, together with loan commitments and financial guarantee contracts, in this section all referred to as ‘financial instruments’. Equity instruments are not subject to impairment under IFRS 9.
The ECL allowance is based on the credit losses expected to arise over the life of the asset (the lifetime expected 
credit losses or LTECL), unless there has been no significant increase in credit risk since origination, in which case, the allowance is based on the 12 months’ expected credit losses (12m ECL) as outlined in Note 4.10.1). The Group’s policies for determining if there has been a significant increase in credit risk are set out in Note 6.
The 12mECL is the portion of LTECLs that represent the ECL that result from default events on a financial 
instrument that are possible within the 12 months after the reporting date.
Both LTECL and 12mECL are calculated on either an individual basis or a collective basis, depending on the 
nature of the underlying portfolio of financial instruments. The Group’s policy for grouping financial assets measured on a collective basis is explained in Note 6.
The Group has established a policy to perform an assessment, at the end of each reporting period, of whether 
a financial instrument’s credit risk has increased significantly since initial recognition, by considering the change 
in the risk of default occurring over the remaining life of the financial instrument. This is further explained in 
Note 6.
Based on the above process, the Group bands its loans into Stage 1, Stage 2, Stage 3 and POCI, as described 
below:
• Stage 1: When loans are first recognised, the Bank recognises an allowance based on 12months ECL. Stage 1 loans also include facilities where the credit risk has improved and the loan has been reclassified from    Stage 2.
• Stage 2: When a loan has shown a significant increase in credit risk since origination, the Bank records an allowance for the LTECL. Stage 2 loans also include facilities, where the credit risk has improved and the loan has been reclassified from Stage 3.
• Stage 3: Loans considered credit-impaired (as outlined in Note 6.) The Group records an allowance for the LTECL.
• POCI: Purchased or originated credit impaired (POCI) assets are financial assets that are credit impaired on initial recognition. POCI assets are recorded at fair value at original recognition and interest income is GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202184
subsequently recognised based on a credit-adjusted EIR. The ECL allowance is only recognised or released to 
the extent that there is a subsequent change in the expected credit losses.
For financial assets for which the Group has no reasonable expectations of recovering either the entire outstanding amount, or a proportion thereof, the gross carrying amount of the financial asset is reduced. This 
is considered a (partial) derecognition of the financial asset.
4.10.1  The calculation of ECL
The Group calculates ECL based on a four probability-weighted scenarios to measure the expected cash 
shortfalls, discounted at an approximation to the EIR. A cash shortfall is the difference between the cash flows that are due to an entity in accordance with the contract and the cash flows that the entity expects to receive.
The mechanics of the ECL calculations are outlined below and the key elements are, as follows:
• PD The Probability of Default  is an estimate of the likelihood of default over a given time horizon. A 
default may only happen at a certain time over the assessed period, if the facility has not been 
previously derecognised and is still in the portfolio. The concept of PD is further explained in 
Note 6.
• EAD The Exposure at Default  is an estimate of the exposure at a future default date, taking into account 
expected changes in the exposure after the reporting date, including repayments of principal and 
interest, whether scheduled by contract or otherwise, expected drawdowns on committed facilities, 
and accrued interest from missed payments. The EAD is further explained in Note 6.
• LGD The Loss Given Default is an estimate of the loss arising in the case where a default occurs at a given 
time. It is based on the difference between the contractual cash flows due and those that the lender 
would expect to receive, including from the realisation of any collateral or credit enhancements that 
are integral to the loan and not required to be recognised separately, as set out in Note 4.4(vii). It is 
usually expressed as a percentage of the EAD. The LGD is further explained in Note 6.
When estimating the ECL, the Bank considers three scenarios; a base case, an upside, and a downside. Each of these is associated with different PDs, EADs and LGDs. When relevant, the assessment of multiple scenarios also incorporates how defaulted loans are expected to be recovered, including the probability that the loans will cure 
and the value of collateral or the amount that might be received for selling the asset.
With the exception of other revolving facilities, for which the treatment is separately set out below, the maximum 
period for which the credit losses are determined is the contractual life of a financial instrument unless the Bank has the legal right to call it earlier.
Impairment losses and releases are accounted for and disclosed separately from modification losses or gains 
that are accounted for as an adjustment of the financial asset’s gross carrying value.
Provisions for ECL for undrawn loan commitments are assessed. The calculation of ECL (including the ECL 
related to the undrawn element) of revolving facilities is explained below.
The mechanics of the ECL method are summarised below:
• Stage 1: The 12mECL is calculated as the portion of LTECL that represent the ECL that result from default 
events on a financial instrument that are possible within the 12 months after the reporting date. The Group calculates the 12mECL allowance based on the expectation of a default occurring in the 12 months following the reporting date. These expected 12-month default probabilities are applied to a forecast EAD and multiplied by the expected LGD and discounted by an approximation to the 
original EIR. This calculation is made for each of the four scenarios, as explained above.
• Stage 2: When a loan has shown a significant increase in credit risk since origination, the Group records an allowance for the LTECL. The mechanics are similar to those explained above, including the use of 
multiple scenarios, but PDs and LGDs are estimated over the lifetime of the instrument. The expected cash shortfalls are discounted by an approximation to the original EIR.Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 85
• Stage 3: For loans considered credit-impaired (as defined in Note 6), the Group recognises the lifetime 
expected credit losses for these loans. The method is similar to that for Stage 2 assets, with the PD set at 100%.
• POCI: POCI assets are financial assets that are credit impaired on initial recognition. The Group only recognises the cumulative changes in lifetime ECL since initial recognition, based on a probability-weighting of the four scenarios, discounted by the credit adjusted EIR.
• Loan commitment and letters of credit: When estimating LTECL for undrawn loan commitments, the Group estimates the expected portion of the loan commitment that will be drawn down over its expected life. The ECL is then based on the present value of the expected shortfalls in 
cash flows if the loan is drawn down, based on a probability-weighting of the four scenarios. 
The expected cash shortfalls are discounted at an approximation to the expected EIR on the loan.
• For revolving facilities that include both a loan and an undrawn commitment, ECL is calculated and presented together with the loan. For loan commitments and letters of credit, the ECL is also recognised together with the loan.
• Financial guarantee contracts: The Group’s liability under each guarantee is measured at the higher of the amount initially recognised less cumulative amortisation recognised in the income statement, and the ECL provision. For this purpose, the Group estimates ECL based on the 
present value of the expected payments to reimburse the holder for a credit loss that it incurs. 
The shortfalls are discounted by the risk-adjusted interest rate relevant to the exposure. The calculation is made using a probability-weighting of the four scenarios. The ECL related to financial guarantee contracts are recognised within the loan.
4.10.2 Debt instruments measured at fair value through OCI
The ECL for debt instruments measured at FVTOCI do not reduce the carrying amount of these financial assets in the statement of financial position, which remains at fair value. Instead, an amount equal to the allowance that would arise if the assets were measured at amortised cost is recognised in OCI as an accumulated 
impairment amount, with a corresponding charge to profit or loss. The accumulated loss recognised in OCI is 
recycled to the profit and loss upon de-recognition of the assets.
4.10.3 Purchased or originated credit impaired financial assets (POCI)
For POCI financial assets, the Group only recognises the cumulative changes in LTECL since initial recognition in the loss allowance.
4.10.4  Forward looking information
In its ECL models, the Group relies on a broad range of forward looking information as economic inputs, such as:
• GDP growth
• Unemployment rates
• Central Bank base rates
The inputs and models used for calculating ECL may not always capture all characteristics of the market at the date of the financial statements. To reflect this, qualitative adjustments or overlays are occasionally made as temporary adjustments when such differences are significantly material. Detailed information about these 
inputs and sensitivity analysis are provided in Note 6.
4.10.5  Backward transition
If the Group has measured the loss allowance for a financial instrument at an amount equal to lifetime expected 
credit losses, in the previous reporting period, but determines at the current reporting date that there is no longer a sufficient increase in credit risk, the Group measures the loss allowance of an amount equal to 12 
months expected credit losses of the current reporting date.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202186
4.11  Credit enhancements: collateral valuation and financial guarantees
To mitigate its credit risks on financial assets, the Group seeks to use collateral, where possible. The collateral 
comes in various forms, such as cash, securities, letters of credit/guarantees, real estate, receivables, inventories, other non-financial assets and credit enhancements such as netting agreements. Collateral, unless repossessed, 
is not recorded on the Group’s statement of financial position.
Cash flows expected from credit enhancements which are not required to be recognised separately by IFRS and 
which are considered integral to the contractual terms of a debt instrument which is subject to ECL, are included in the measurement of those ECL. On this basis, the fair value of collateral affects the calculation of ECL. Collateral is generally assessed, at a minimum, at inception and re-assessed on a quarterly basis. However, some collateral, for example, cash or securities relating to margining requirements, is valued daily. 
To the extent possible, the Group uses active market data for valuing financial assets held as collateral. Other 
financial assets which do not have readily determinable market values are valued using models. Non-financial collateral, such as real estate, is valued based on data provided by third parties such as mortgage brokers, or based on housing price indices.
Guarantees held are included in the measurement of loan ECLs when either they are specified in the contractual 
terms of the loan or else are integral to the loan, in that they formed part of the basis on which the loan was 
extended. 
Guarantees that are not integral to the loan’s contractual terms are accounted as separate units of accounts 
subject to ECL. 
4.12  Collateral repossessed
The Group’s policy is to determine whether a repossessed asset can be best used for its internal operations or should be sold. Assets determined to be useful for the internal operations are transferred to their relevant asset category at the lower of their repossessed value or the carrying value of the original secured asset. Assets for 
which selling is determined to be a better option are transferred to assets held for sale at their fair value (if 
financial assets) and fair value less cost to sell for non-financial assets at the repossession date, in line with the Group’s policy.
In its normal course of business, the Group engages external agents to recover funds from the repossessed 
assets, generally at auction, to settle outstanding debt. Any surplus funds are returned to the customers/
obligors. As a result of this practice, the residential properties under legal repossession processes are not 
recorded on the balance sheet.
4.13  Write-offs
Financial assets are written off either partially or in their entirety only when the Group has no reasonable expectation of recovering a financial asset in its entirety or a portion thereof. If the amount to be written off is greater than the accumulated loss allowance, the difference is first treated as an addition to the allowance that 
is then applied against the gross carrying amount. Any subsequent recoveries are credited to credit loss expense.
4.14  Forborne and modified loans
The Group sometimes makes concessions or modifications to the original terms of loans as a response to the 
borrower’s financial difficulties, rather than taking possession or to otherwise enforce collection of collateral. The Group considers a loan forborne when such concessions or modifications are provided as a result of the 
borrower’s present or expected financial difficulties and the Group would not have agreed to them if the 
borrower had been financially healthy. Indicators of financial difficulties include defaults on covenants, or significant concerns raised by the Credit Risk Department. Forbearance may involve extending the payment arrangements and the agreement of new loan conditions. Once the terms have been renegotiated, any impairment is measured using the original EIR as calculated before the modification of terms. It is the Group’s policy to monitor forborne loans to help ensure that future payments continue to be likely to occur. De-Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 87
recognition decisions and classification between Stage 2 and Stage 3 are determined on a case-by-case basis. 
If these procedures identify a loss in relation to a loan, it is disclosed and managed as an impaired Stage 3 forborne asset until it is collected or written off.
When the loan has been renegotiated or modified but not derecognised, the Group also reassesses whether 
there has been a significant increase in credit risk, as set out in Note 6. the Group also considers whether the assets should be classified as Stage 3. Once an asset has been classified as forborne, it will remain forborne for a minimum 24-month probation period. In order for the loan to be reclassified out of the forborne category, the 
customer has to meet all of the following criteria:
• All of its facilities have to be considered performing
• The probation period of two years has passed from the date the forborne contract was considered performing
• Regular payments of more than an insignificant amount of principal or interest have been made during at 
least half of the probation period
• The customer does not have any contracts that are more than 30 days past due.
If modifications are substantial, the loan is derecognised, as explained in Note 4.9.1.
4.15  Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents in the Group statement of financial position and cash flow statement include notes and coins on hand, balances held with Bank of Ghana, other bank balances and highly liquid financial assets with original maturities of three months or less from the date of acquisition that are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in their fair value and are used by the Group in the management of its short-term commitments. 
4.16  Repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase at a specified future date are not derecognised from the statement of financial position as the Group retains substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership. The corresponding cash received is recognised in the consolidated statement of financial position as an asset with 
a corresponding obligation to return it, including accrued interest as a liability within cash collateral on securities 
lent and repurchase agreements, reflecting the transaction’s economic substance as a loan to the Group. The difference between the sale and repurchase prices is treated as interest expense and is accrued over the life of agreement using the EIR. When the counterparty has the right to sell or re-pledge the securities, the Group reclassifies those securities in its statement of financial position to financial assets held for trading pledged as collateral or to financial investments available-for-sale pledged as collateral, as appropriate.
Conversely, securities purchased under agreements to resell at a specified future date are not recognised in the 
statement of financial position. The consideration paid, including accrued interest, is recorded in the statement of financial position, within cash collateral on securities borrowed and reverse repurchase agreements, reflecting the transaction’s economic substance as a loan by the Group. The difference between the purchase and resale prices is recorded in net interest income and is accrued over the life of the agreement using the EIR.
If securities purchased under an agreement to resell are subsequently sold to third parties, the obligation to 
return the securities is recorded as a short sale within financial liabilities held for trading and measured at fair value with any gains or losses included in net trading income.
4.17  Securities lending and borrowing
Securities lending and borrowing transactions are usually collateralised by securities or cash. The transfer of the securities to counterparties is only reflected on the statement of financial position if the risks and rewards of ownership are also transferred. Cash advanced or received as collateral is recorded as an asset or liability.
Securities borrowed are not recognised in the statement of financial position, unless they are then sold to third 
parties, in which case, the obligation to return the securities is recorded as a short sale within financial liabilities 
held for trading and measured at fair value with any gains or losses included in net trading income.
4.18  Leases  
The Group assesses at contract inception whether a contract is, or contains, a lease. That is, if the contract conveys the right to control the use of an identified asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202188
4.18.1 The Group as a lessee
The Group assesses whether a contract is or contains a lease, at inception of the contract. The Group recognises 
a right-of-use asset and a corresponding lease liability with respect to all lease arrangements in which it is the lessee, except for short-term leases (defined as leases with a lease term of 12 months or less) and leases of low 
value assets (such as tablets and personal computers, small items of office furniture and telephones). For these 
leases, the Group recognises the lease payments as an operating expense on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease unless another systematic basis is more representative of the time pattern in which economic benefits from the leased assets are consumed.
The lease liability is initially measured at the present value of the lease payments that are not paid at the 
commencement date, discounted by using the rate implicit in the lease. If this rate cannot be readily determined, the Group uses its incremental borrowing rate.
Lease payments included in the measurement of the lease liability comprise:
• Fixed lease payments (including in-substance fixed payments), less any lease incentives receivable;
• Variable lease payments that depend on an index or rate, initially measured using the index or rate at the 
commencement date;
• The amount expected to be payable by the lessee under residual value guarantees;
• The exercise price of purchase options, if the lessee is reasonably certain to exercise the options; and
• Payments of penalties for terminating the lease, if the lease term reflects the exercise of an option to terminate the lease.
The lease liability is included in Other Liabilities in the statements of financial position.
The lease liability is subsequently measured by increasing the carrying amount to reflect interest on the lease 
liability (using the effective interest method) and by reducing the carrying amount to reflect the lease payments made.
The Group remeasures the lease liability (and makes a corresponding adjustment to the related right-of-use 
asset) whenever: 
• The lease term has changed or there is a significant event or change in circumstances resulting in a change in the assessment of exercise of a purchase option, in which case the lease liability is remeasured by discounting the revised lease payments using a revised discount rate.
• The lease payments change due to changes in an index or rate or a change in expected payment under a guaranteed residual value, in which cases the lease liability is remeasured by discounting the revised lease payments using an unchanged discount rate (unless the lease payments change is due to a change 
in a floating interest rate, in which case a revised discount rate is used).
• A lease contract is modified and the lease modification is not accounted for as a separate lease, in which 
case the lease liability is remeasured based on the lease term of the modified lease by discounting the revised lease payments using a revised discount rate at the effective date of the modification. 
The Group did not make any such adjustments during the periods presented.
The right-of-use assets comprise the initial measurement of the corresponding lease liability, lease payments 
made at or before the commencement day, less any lease incentives received and any initial direct costs. They are subsequently measured at cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses. Whenever the Group incurs an obligation for costs to dismantle and remove a leased asset, restore the site on which it is located or 
restore the underlying asset to the condition required by the terms and conditions of the lease, a provision is 
recognised and measured under IAS 37. To the extent that the costs relate to a right-of use asset, the costs are included in the related right-of-use asset, unless those costs are incurred to produce inventories.Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 89
Right-of-use assets are depreciated over the shorter period of lease term and useful life of the right-of-use 
asset. If a lease transfers ownership of the underlying asset or the cost of the right-of-use asset reflects that the Group expects to exercise a purchase option, the related right-of-use asset is depreciated over the useful life of 
the underlying asset. The depreciation starts at the commencement date of the lease. 
The right-of-use assets are presented within Property and Equipment in the statements of financial position.The Group applies IAS 36 to determine whether a right-of-use asset is impaired and accounts for any identified 
impairment loss as described in Note 4.21 Impairment of non-financial assets. Variable rents that do not depend on an index or rate are not included in the measurement the lease liability and the right-of-use asset. The 
related payments are recognised as an expense in the period in which the event or condition that triggers those 
payments occurs and are included in the line “Other expenses” in profit or loss (see note 16). 
As a practical expedient, IFRS 16 permits a lessee not to separate non-lease components, and instead account 
for any lease and associated non-lease components as a single arrangement. The Group has not used this practical expedient. For a contract that contain a lease component and one or more additional lease or non-lease components, the Group allocates the consideration in the contract to each lease component on the basis 
of the relative stand-alone price of the lease component and the aggregate stand-alone price of the non-lease 
components.
4.18.2  The Group as a lessor
The Group enters into lease agreements as a lessor with respect to some of its investment properties.
Leases for which the Group is a lessor are classified as finance or operating leases. Whenever the terms of the 
lease transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the lessee, the contract is classified as a finance lease. All other leases are classified as operating leases. When the Group is an intermediate lessor, it 
accounts for the head lease and the sub-lease as two separate contracts. The sub-lease is classified as a finance 
or operating lease by reference to the right-of-use asset arising from the head lease. 
Rental income from operating leases is recognised on a straight-line basis over the term of the relevant lease. 
Initial direct costs incurred in negotiating and arranging an operating lease are added to the carrying amount of the leased asset and recognised on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Amounts due from lessees under 
finance leases are recognised as receivables at the amount of the Group’s net investment in the leases. Finance 
lease income is allocated to accounting periods so as to reflect a constant periodic rate of return on the Group’s net investment outstanding in respect of the leases. Subsequent to initial recognition, the Group regularly reviews the estimated unguaranteed residual value and applies the impairment requirements of IFRS 9, recognising an allowance for expected credit losses on the lease receivables.
Finance lease income is calculated with reference to the gross carrying amount of the lease receivables, except 
for credit-impaired financial assets for which interest income is calculated with reference to their amortised cost (i.e. after a deduction of the loss allowance). When a contract includes both lease and non-lease components, the Group applies IFRS 15 to allocate the consideration under the contract to each component.
4.19  Property and equipment 
Property and equipment are tangible items that are held for use in the production or supply of goods or services, for rental to others, or for administrative purposes and are expected to be used during more than one period. 
(i) Recognition and measurementItems of property and equipment are measured at cost less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated 
impairment losses. Cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the assets. Right-
of-use assets are presented together with property and equipment in the statement of financial position – refer to the accounting policy in Note 4.18.
Purchased software that is integral to the functionality of the related equipment is capitalized as part of that 
equipment. When parts of an item of property or equipment have different useful lives, they are accounted for 
as separate items (major components) of property and equipment.
The cost of self-constructed assets includes the cost of materials and direct labour and any other costs directly 
attributable to bringing the asset to a working condition for its intended use.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202190
Any gain or loss on disposal of an item of property and equipment (calculated as the difference between the net 
proceeds from disposal and the carrying amount of the item) is recognised within other income in profit or loss.
(ii) Subsequent costs
The cost of replacing part of an item of property or equipment is recognised in the carrying amount of the item 
if it is probable that future economic benefits embodied within the part will flow to the Company and its cost can be measured reliably. The costs of the day to day servicing of property and equipment are recognised in profit or loss as incurred.
(iii) DepreciationDepreciation is the systematic allocation of the depreciable amount of an asset (i.e. the cost of the asset, or 
other amount substituted for cost, less its residual value) over its useful life.
Depreciation is recognised in profit or loss on a straight line basis over the estimated useful lives of each part of 
an item of property and equipment. Freehold Land is not depreciated.
The estimated useful lives for the current and comparative periods are as follows:
Computers 3 years
Motor vehicles 4 years
Furniture and equipment 3-4 years
Buildings 50 years
Depreciation methods, useful lives and residual values are reviewed at each reporting date and adjusted if 
appropriate.
Right-of-use assets are depreciated over the shorter period of the lease term and the useful life of the underlying 
asset. If a lease transfers ownership of the underlying asset or the cost of the right-of-use asset reflects that the Group expects to exercise a purchase option, the related right-of-use asset is depreciated over the useful life of 
the underlying asset.
(iv) Capital work-in-progressProperty and equipment under construction is stated at initial cost and depreciated from the date the asset is 
made available for use over its estimated useful life. Assets are transferred from capital work in progress to an appropriate class of property and equipment when commissioned and ready for its intended use.
(v) Dual use property
Properties that are partly used for own use activities and partly for rental activities are considered dual use 
properties. This would result in the property being considered to be classified as part property and equipment and the other part as investment property. If a significant portion of the property is used for own use and the portion rented out cannot be sold or leased out separately under a finance lease, then the entire property is 
classified as property and equipment. The Group considers an own use portion above 95% of the measure as 
significant.
(vi) DerecognitionProperty and equipment are derecognised upon disposal or when no future economic benefits are expected to 
flow to the Group from either their use or disposal, if applicable. The gain or loss arising on the disposal or retirement of an asset is determined as the difference between the sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and is recognised in profit or loss.Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 91
4.20  Intangible assets
Intangible assets are the identifiable non-monetary assets without physical substance.
Intangible assets comprise computer software licenses and customer relationship. Intangible assets acquired by 
the Group and have finite useful lives are measured at cost less accumulated amortization and any accumulated impairment losses. 
Subsequent expenditure is capitalised only when it increases future economic benefits embodied in the specific 
asset to which it relates. All other expenditure is expensed as incurred.
Amortisation is calculated to write off the cost of intangible assets less their estimated residual values using the 
straightline method and recognised in profit or loss over its estimated useful life, from the date that it is available for use.
The estimated useful life for the current and comparative periods are as follows:
Software       3 years
Customer Relationship      5 years
Amortization methods, useful lives and residual values are reviewed at each reporting date and adjusted, if 
appropriate.
An intangible asset is derecognised on disposal, or when no future economic benefits are expected from use or 
disposal. Gains or losses arising from derecognition of an intangible asset, measured as the difference between 
the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset, are recognised in profit or loss when the asset 
is derecognised.
4.21  Impairment of non financial assets
The carrying amounts of the Group’s non financial assets other than deferred tax assets are reviewed at each reporting date to determine whether there is any indication of impairment. If any such indication exists then the asset’s recoverable amount is estimated. An impairment loss is recognised if the carrying amount of an asset or 
its cash generating unit (CGU) exceeds its recoverable amount, unless the relevant asset is carried at a revalued 
amount, in which case the impairment loss is treated as a revaluation decrease and to the extent that the impairment loss is greater than the related revaluation surplus, the excess impairment loss is recognised in profit or loss.
The recoverable amount is the higher of its value in use and its fair value less costs of disposal. In assessing 
value in use, the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using pre-tax discount rates 
that reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and risks specific to the asset.
A previously recognised impairment loss is reversed where there has been a change in circumstances or in the 
basis of estimation used to determine the recoverable value, but only to the extent that the asset’s net carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount of the asset that would have been determined, net of depreciation or amortisation, if no impairment loss had been recognised. Any increase in excess of this amount is treated as a revaluation increase.
4.22  Employment benefits
(i) Defined contribution plans
Obligations for contributions to defined contribution pension plans are recognised as personnel expenses in 
profit or loss in the period during which related services are rendered. The Group has the following defined contribution schemes:
• Social Security and National Insurance Trust
Under the national pension scheme, the Bank contributes 13% of employees’ basic salary to the Social Security and National Insurance Trust (SSNIT) for employee pensions. The Group’s obligation is limited to the relevant contributions, which have been recognised in the financial statements. The pension liabilities and obligations, 
however, rest with SSNIT.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202192
• Provident Fund
The Group has a Provident Fund Scheme for all employees who have completed their probation period. 
Employees contribute 10% of their basic salary to the Fund whilst the Group contributes 12.5%. Obligations under the plan are limited to the relevant contributions which have been recognised in the financial statements 
and are settled on due dates to the Fund Manager.
(ii) Defined benefit plansThe Group’s obligation in respect of defined benefit plans is calculated separately for each plan by estimating 
the amount of future benefits that employees have earned in the current and prior periods, discounting that amount and deducting the fair value of any plan assets.
The calculation of defined benefit obligations is performed annually by a Qualified Actuary using the Projected 
Unit Credit Method. Remeasurements of the net defined benefit liability, which comprise actuarial gains and 
losses is recognised immediately in other comprehensive income.
The Group determines the net interest expense (income) on the defined benefit liability for the period by 
applying the discount rate used to measure the defined benefit obligation at the beginning of the annual period to the defined benefit liability at the period end, taking into account any changes in the defined benefit liability during the period as a result of contributions and benefit payments.
Net interest expense and other expenses related to defined benefit plans are recognised in personnel expenses 
in profit or loss. When the benefits of a plan are changed or when a plan is curtailed, the resulting change in benefits that relate to past service or the gain or loss on curtailment is recognised immediately in profit or loss. The Group recognises gains and losses on the settlement of a defined benefit plan when the settlement occurs.
The Group has the following defined benefit plans:
• Post-Retirement Medical Care
The Bank pays for post-retirement medical care of its staff.
• Pension Benefits
The Group pays monthly pension benefits to retired employees, under a closed defined benefit pension scheme. 
Under this scheme, beneficiaries are paid pensions equal to 60% of the net basic salaries of their serving 
counterparts. The scheme has been discontinued since 1985. At the reporting date, the scheme covered a 
closed group of 290 (2020: 311) persons, who still receive monthly pensions. The monthly pensions are increased annually in line with adjustments to the basic salaries of their serving counterparts.
• Long service award
Long service awards accrue to employees based on graduated periods of uninterrupted service. These awards accrue over the service life of employees. Employees in service with the Group after fifteen (15) years become 
eligible to receive cash payments at graduated rates when employees achieve stipulated milestones set by the 
Group.
(iii) Other long term employee benefitsThe Company’s obligation in respect of long term employee benefits is the amount of future benefits that 
employees have earned in return for their services in the current and prior periods. That benefit is discounted to determine its present value. Re-measurement are recognised in profit or loss in the period in which they 
arise. 
(iv) Termination benefitsThe Group recognises termination benefits when it is demonstrably committed to either terminating the 
employment of current employees according to a detailed formal plan; or providing termination benefits as a result of an offer made to encourage voluntary redundancy. If benefits are not expected to be wholly settled 
within 12 months of the reporting date, then they are discounted.Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 93
(v) Short term Employment benefits 
Short term employee benefit obligations are measured on an undiscounted basis and are expensed as the 
related service is provided. A provision is recognised for the amount expected to be paid under short term cash bonus or profit sharing plans, if the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation to pay this amount as a result of past service provided by the employee and the obligation can be estimated reliably.
4.23  Provisions and Contingent Liabilities
Provisions
A provision is recognised if, as a result of a past event, the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation 
that can be estimated reliably, and it is probable that an outflow of the economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation. Provisions are not recognised for future operating losses.
Provisions are measured at the present value of expenditures expected to be required to settle obligations using 
pre-tax rates that reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and risks specific to the 
obligation. The unwinding of the discount is recognised as finance cost. The expense relating to any provision is presented in the income statement net of any reimbursement in other operating expenses. When some or all of the economic benefits required to settle a provision are expected to be recovered from a third party, a receivable is recognised as an asset if it is virtually certain that reimbursement will be received and the amount 
of the receivable can be measured reliably. Detailed disclosures are provided in Note 38 .
Contingent liabilities
A contingent liability is a possible obligation that arises from past events and whose existence will be confirmed 
only by the occurrence or non-occurrence of one or more uncertain future events not wholly within the control of the Group, or a present obligation that arises from past events but is not recognised because it is not probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation; or 
the amount of the obligation cannot be measured with sufficient reliability. If the likelihood of an outflow of 
resources is remote, the possible obligation is neither a provision nor a contingent liability and no disclosure is made.
4.24  Taxation
The income tax expense represents the sum of the tax currently payable and deferred tax.
4.24.1.  Current tax 
The tax currently payable is based on taxable profit for the year. Taxable profit differs from net profit as reported in profit or loss because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible. The Group’s liability for current tax is calculated 
using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the end of the reporting period.
A provision is recognised for those matters for which the tax determination is uncertain but it is considered 
probable that there will be a future outflow of funds to a tax authority. The provisions are measured at the best estimate of the amount expected to become payable. The assessment is based on the judgement of tax professionals within the Group supported by previous experience in respect of such activities and in certain cases based on specialist independent tax advice. 
Current tax assets and liabilities for the current and prior years are measured at the amount expected to be 
recovered from, or paid to, the taxation authorities. The tax rates and tax laws used to compute the amount are those that are enacted, or substantively enacted, by the reporting date in the countries where the Group operates and generates taxable income.
Current income tax relating to items recognised directly in equity or other comprehensive income is recognised 
in equity or other comprehensive income respectively and not in the statement of profit or loss. Management 
periodically evaluates positions taken in the tax returns with respect to situations in which applicable tax regulations are subject to interpretation and establishes provisions where appropriate. Detailed disclosures are provided in Note 19 .GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202194
4.24.2.  Deferred tax
Deferred tax is provided on temporary differences at the reporting date between the tax bases of assets and 
liabilities and their carrying amounts for financial reporting purposes.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for all taxable temporary differences, except:
• Where the deferred tax liability arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or of an asset or liability in a 
transaction that is not a business combination and, at the time of the transaction, affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss;
• In respect of taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiary and associates, where the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each reporting date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow all or part of the deferred tax asset to be utilised. Unrecognised deferred tax assets are reassessed at each reporting date and are recognised to the extent that it becomes probable that future taxable profit will allow the deferred tax asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the year when the 
asset is realised or the liability is settled, based on tax rates (and tax laws) that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date.
Current and deferred taxes are recognised as income tax benefits or expenses in the income statement except 
for tax related to the fair value re-measurement of debt instruments at fair value through OCI, foreign exchange 
differences and the net movement on cash flow hedges, which are charged or credited to OCI.
These exceptions are subsequently reclassified from OCI to the income statement together with the respective 
deferred loss or gain. The Group also recognises the tax consequences of payments and issuing costs, related to financial instruments that are classified as equity, directly in equity.
The Group only off-sets its deferred tax assets against liabilities when there is both a legal right to offset its 
current tax assets and liabilities and it is the Group’s intention to settle on a net basis.
4.24.3.  Levies and similar charges
The Group recognises the liability arising from levies and similar charges (such as National Stabilization Levy and Financial Sector Recovery Levy) when it becomes legally enforceable (i.e., when the obligating event arises) which is on 31 December each year.
4.25  Stated capital and reserves
(i) Share capital
The Group classifies capital and equity instruments in accordance with the contractual terms of the instrument. 
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of ordinary shares, net of any tax effects are recognised as a deduction from equity.
(ii) Dividends
Dividends on ordinary shares are recognised in the period in which they are approved by the shareholders. 
Dividend proposed which is yet to be approved by shareholders, is disclosed by way of notes.
(iii) Statutory reserve
Statutory reserve is based on the requirements of section 34(1) of the Banks and Specialized Deposit-Taking 
Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930). Transfers into statutory reserve are made in accordance with the relationship between the Bank’s reserve fund and it’s paid up capital, which determines the proportion of profits for the period that should be transferred.Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 95
i. Where the reserve fund is less than fifty percent of the stated capital, then an amount not less than 50% 
of net profit for the year is transferred to the reserve fund.
ii. Where the reserve fund is more than 50% but less than 100% of the stated capital, then an amount not less than 25% of net profit is transferred to the reserve fund.
iii. Where the reserve is equal to or more than 100% of the stated capital, then an amount not less than 12.5% of the net profit for the year is transferred to the reserve fund.
iv. Credit risk reserve
This is a reserve created to set aside the excess or shortfalls between amounts recognised as impairment loss on loans and advances based on provisions made for bad and doubtful loans and advances calculated in accordance with IFRS and the Central Bank’s prudential guidelines. See note 36iii.
4.26  Earnings per share
The Bank presents basic and diluted earnings per share (EPS) data for its ordinary shares. Basic EPS is calculated by dividing the profit or loss attributable to ordinary shareholders by the number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. The Bank has no convertible notes and share options, which could potentially dilute its EPS 
and therefore the Bank’s Basic and diluted EPS are essentially the same.
4.27  Fiduciary assets
The Bank provides trust and other fiduciary services that result in the holding or investing of assets on behalf 
of its clients. Assets held in a fiduciary capacity, unless recognition criteria are met, are not reported in the 
financial statements, as they are not assets of the Bank.
4.28  Segment reporting
Segment results that are reported to the Group’s Managing Director (being the chief operating decision maker) 
include items that are directly attributable to a segment as well as those that can be allocated on a reasonable basis. Unallocated items comprise mainly corporate assets (primarily the Bank’s property and equipment), head 
office expenses and tax assets and liabilities.
The Group has four reportable segments: retail banking, corporate banking, commercial banking, and treasury 
which are the Group’s strategic operations. For each reportable segment, the Group’s Managing Director reviews internal management reports on the performance of each segment.
5.  Significant accounting judgements, estimates and assumptions
The preparation of the Group’s financial statements requires management to make judgements, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities, and the accompanying disclosures, as well as the disclosure of contingent liabilities. Uncertainty about these assumptions and estimates 
could result in outcomes that require a material adjustment to the carrying amount of assets or liabilities 
affected in future periods. In the process of applying the Group’s accounting policies, management has made the following judgements and assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty at the reporting date, that have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year. The estimates and associated assumptions are based on historical experience and other factors that are considered to be relevant. 
Existing circumstances and assumptions about future developments may change due to circumstances beyond 
the Group’s control and are reflected in the assumptions if and when they occur. 
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis. Revisions to accounting estimates 
are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period, or in the 
period of the revision and future periods if the revision affects both current and future periods.
Items with the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in the consolidated financial statements with 
substantial management judgement and/or estimates are collated below with respect to judgements/estimates involved.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202196
5.1.  Expected credit losses (ECL) on financial assets
The measurement of ECL under IFRS 9 across all categories of financial assets in scope requires some level of 
judgement. In particular, management makes its significant judgement in the assessment of significant increase in credit risk and default. As explained in note 4.10, ECL are measured as an allowance equal to 12-month ECL 
for stage 1 assets, or lifetime ECL for stage 2 or stage 3 assets. An asset moves to stage 3 when its credit risk has 
increased significantly and has met predefined default criteria since initial recognition. The term “default” is not defined in IFRS 9. In assessing whether an asset has met the predefined default criteria, the Group takes into account qualitative and quantitative reasonable and supportable forward-looking information.
5.2.  Fair value of financial instruments
The fair value of financial instruments is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction in the principal (or most advantageous) market at the measurement date under current market conditions (i.e., an exit price) regardless of whether that price is directly observable or estimated 
using another valuation technique. When the fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities recorded in 
the statement of financial position cannot be derived from active markets, they are determined using a variety of valuation techniques that include the use of valuation models. The inputs to these models are taken from observable markets where possible, but where this is not feasible, estimation is required in establishing fair values. Judgements and estimates include considerations of liquidity and model inputs related to items such as credit risk (both own and counterparty), funding value adjustments, correlation and volatility.
For further details about determination of fair value, please see Note 4.6.
5.3.  Provisions and other contingent liabilities
The Group operates in a regulatory and legal environment that, by nature, has a heightened element of litigation 
risk inherent to its operations. As a result, it is involved in various litigation, arbitration and regulatory investigations and proceedings arising in the ordinary course of the Group’s business.
When the Group can reliably measure the outflow of economic benefits in relation to a specific case and 
considers such outflows to be probable, the Group records a provision against the case. Where the probability 
of outflow is considered to be remote, or probable, but a reliable estimate cannot be made, a contingent liability is disclosed. However, when the Group is of the opinion that disclosing these estimates on a case-by-case basis would prejudice their outcome, then the Bank does not include detailed, case-specific disclosers in its financial statements.
Given the subjectivity and uncertainty of determining the probability and amount of losses, the Group takes into 
account a number of factors including legal advice, the stage of the matter and historical evidence from similar incidents. Significant judgement is required to conclude on these estimates.
For further details on provisions and other contingencies, see Notes 4.23 and 37.
5.4  Employee benefit obligations: Discount rate used to determine the carrying amount of the 
Group’s defined benefit obligation
The determination of the Group’s defined benefit obligation depends on certain assumptions, which include 
selection of the discount rate. The discount rate is set by reference to market yields at the end of the reporting period on high quality corporate bonds or, where there is not an active market in high quality corporate bonds, 
the market yields (at the end of the reporting period) on government bonds are used. Significant assumptions 
are required to be made when setting the criteria for bonds to be included in the population from which the yield curve is derived. The most significant criteria considered for the selection of bonds include the currency of the bonds, quality of the bonds and the term of the bonds. These assumptions are considered to be a key source of estimation uncertainty as relatively small changes in the assumptions used may have a significant effect on the Group’s financial statements within the next year. Further information on the carrying amounts of the 
Group’s defined benefit obligation and the sensitivity of those amounts to changes in discount rate are provided 
in note 35.Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 97
6.  Financial risk management
Effective risk management is of critical importance and key to the delivery of sustainable returns for shareholders. 
Risk taking is an inherent part of the Group’s business activities and is defined as the possibility of losing some or all of an original investment. Risk management systems and governance structures are designed to reduce 
earnings volatility and achieve an appropriate balance between risk and reward and increased profitability. 
Current changes to regulations in the banking sector reinforce the Group’s commitment to embed an enhanced 
risk based culture throughout the Group. Risk policies and procedures are regularly reviewed to reflect these changes as well as best practices in the market. The Group has upgraded its risk infrastructure to enhance effective management and also to meet future regulatory demands.
Risk Management Framework 
The risk management framework consists of a comprehensive set of policies, standards, procedures and processes designed to identify, measure, monitor, mitigate and report significant risk exposure in a consistent and effective manner across the Group. Through the framework, risk is managed at enterprise-wide level, with 
the objective of maximizing risk-adjusted returns within the context of the Group’s risk appetite.
The most important types of risk are credit risk, liquidity risk, market risk and operational risk. 
• Credit risk reflects the possible inability of a customer to meet his/her repayment or delivery obligations. 
• Market risk, which includes foreign currency risk, interest rate risk and equity price risk, is the risk of fluctuation 
in asset and commodity values caused by changes in market prices and yields. 
• Liquidity risk results in the inability to accommodate liability maturities and withdrawals, fund asset growth or otherwise meet contractual obligations at reasonable market rates. 
• Operational risk is the potential loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, systems, people, legal issues, external events and non-compliance with regulatory issues.
The Board of Directors have overall responsibility for the establishment and oversight of the Group’s risk management framework. The Board’s commitment to good risk management is supported by their continuing 
professional development in the field of risk management and their support for the implementation and 
continued improvement of the risk management framework within the Group. 
The Board’s Risk Committee is responsible for monitoring risk positions which the Group holds in the normal 
course of business as well as those risks that the Group may take in alignment with approved limits and controls. The Committee also reviews the adequacy of the risk management framework in relation to risks faced by the 
Group on an ongoing basis. The Committee is assisted in its functions by a risk management structure, which 
ensures consistent assessment of risk management controls and procedures. 
The Board Audit Committee is responsible for reviewing the Group’s accounting policies, the contents of financial 
reports, disclosure controls and procedures, management’s approach to internal controls, the adequacy and scope of the external and internal audit functions, compliance with regulatory and financial reporting 
requirements, overseeing relationships with the Group’s external auditors and providing assurance to the Board 
that executive management’s control assurance process are complete and effective.
The Credit Committee is the highest management level authority on all counterparty risk exposures. It oversees 
control and management of all policies, processes and procedures relating to the Bank’s lending function. The scope of risks covered by this Committee includes Credit Risk, Concentration Risk and Country & Cross Border Risk. 
The Operational Risk and Control Committee is an Executive Management Committee with responsibility for 
monitoring and managing the level of operational risk exposures within the Bank as well as overseeing the 
control and management of all policies, processes and procedures relating to the Bank’s Operational Risk 
function. 
Asset and Liability Committee (ALCO) is a Management Committee which is a decision making body for 
developing policies relating to all asset and liability management (ALM) matters. 
The Risk Management Department (RMD) is responsible for developing and monitoring the Group’s risk 
management policies and procedures over specified areas on a day-to-day basis. It reports regularly to the GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 202198
Board on its activities through the Executive Management Committee. Policies and procedures have been 
established to identify and analyze risks faced by the Bank and put appropriate controls in place to monitor adherence to these policies. These are reviewed regularly to reflect changes in market conditions, products and 
services offered. 
Functional units or divisions are accountable for executing specific aspects of the Group’s activities. Authority is 
delegated to the Head of each functional unit by the Managing Director. The Head of each function in turn delegates responsibility to individual staff for carrying out specific tasks in accordance with delegated authorities 
and within the procedural disciplines of the Group. 
Functions are organized in accordance with the “Three Lines of Defence” governance model. The three lines of 
defence are constituted as follows:
The first line of defence consists of functional units that are responsible for actual activities of the business and 
are responsible for managing their own risks. 
The second line of defence consists of functional units that are responsible for monitoring activities of the first 
line of defence and exercising risk control. The second line functions of the Bank are Governance, Risk, 
Compliance and Control, Product Control and Performance Monitoring. 
The third line of defence consists of functional units that are responsible for reviewing the activities of line 1 and 
2 functions at appropriate frequencies, assessing the robustness of control and mandating corrective action or improvement where necessary. Risk Assurance services are provided to the Bank by the Internal Audit function.
Risk Appetite
Risk appetite is an expression of the amount of risk the Group is willing to take in pursuit of its strategic objectives, reflecting capacity to sustain losses and continue to meet obligations arising from a range of different stress conditions. 
This is used to maximize returns without exposing the Group to levels of risk above its appetite. In particular, the 
risk appetite framework assists in protecting financial performance and improves management’s responsiveness. It also improves control and co-ordination of risk-taking across business units and identifies unused risk capacity in pursuit of profitable opportunities. 
The Group’s risk appetite statement is under review by the Board and will form the basis for establishing the risk 
parameters within which business units must operate, including policies, concentration limits and business mix.
a). Credit Risk Management
Credit risk is the potential for financial loss due to the failure of counterparties to meet obligations to pay the Group in accordance with agreed terms. Credit risk is the most important risk for the Group’s business. 
Management carefully manages its exposure to credit risk. Credit risk is attributed to both on-balance sheet 
financial instruments such as loans, overdrafts, cash held with other financial institutions, debt securities and 
other bills, investments, and acceptances and credit equivalent amounts related to off -balance sheet financial items. The Bank’s approach to credit risk management preserves the independence and integrity of risk assessment, while being integrated into business management processes. Credit risk is managed through a framework that sets out policies and procedures covering the identification, measurement and management of 
credit risk. The goal of credit risk management is to evaluate and manage credit risk in order to further enhance 
a strong credit culture.Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 99
Credit Concentration Risk
Credit concentration risk is the risk of loss to the Group arising from excessive concentration of exposure to a 
single counterparty, industry sector, product or geographic area. Large exposure limits have been established under the Group’s credit policy in order to avoid excessive losses from any single counter-party who is unable 
to fulfil its payment obligations. These risks are monitored on an ongoing basis and subject to annual or more 
frequent reviews when considered necessary.
Credit Mitigation
Potential credit losses from any given account, customer or portfolio are mitigated using a range of tools such as collateral, credit insurance and other guarantees. The reliance that can be placed on these mitigants is carefully assessed in the light of issues such as legal certainty and enforceability, market valuation and 
counterparty risk of the guarantor. Risk mitigation policies determine the eligibility of collateral types.
Collateral
In order to proactively respond to credit deterioration, the Group employs a range of policies and practices to 
mitigate credit risk. The most traditional of these is the taking of security for funds advanced, which is common practice. Collateral is held to mitigate credit risk exposures. Collateral types that are eligible for risk mitigation 
include: cash; residential, commercial and industrial property; property and equipment such as motor vehicles, 
plant and machinery, bank guarantees and floating charge over other assets. 
The risk mitigation policy prescribes the frequency of valuation for different collateral types, based on the level 
of price volatility of each type of collateral and the nature of the underlying product or risk exposure. Where 
appropriate, collateral values are adjusted to reflect current market conditions. Longer-term finance and lending 
to corporate entities are generally secured; individual credit facilities are generally unsecured. In addition, in order to minimize credit losses, the Group seeks additional collateral from counterparties as soon as impairment indicators are noticed for relevant individual loans and advances. 
Credit Related Commitments
Documentary and commercial letters of credit are written undertakings by the Group on behalf of a customer authorizing a third party to draw drafts on the Group up to a stipulated amount under specific terms and conditions. The primary purpose of these instruments is to ensure that funds are available to a customer as 
required. 
Guarantees and standby letters of credit carry less risk than direct loans. These arrangements are collateralized 
by the underlying shipments of goods. The likelihood of loss amounts is far less than the entire commitment as most commitments to extend credit of this nature are contingent upon the customer maintaining specific cash in margin accounts. The Group monitors the term to maturity of credit commitments because longer-term commitments generally have a greater degree of credit risk than shorter-term commitments.
Impairment
Under IFRS 9, Banks are required to record an allowance for expected losses for all loans and other debt financial assets at amortised costs, loan commitments and financial guarantee contracts. The allowance is based on the expected credit losses associated with the probability of default in the next twelve months unless 
there has been a significant increase in credit risk since origination, in which case, the allowance is based on the 
probability of default over the life of the asset. 
The measurement of expected credit losses is primarily based on the product of the instrument’s probability of 
default (PD), loss given default (LGD), and exposure at default (EAD), discounted to the reporting date using the 
effective interest rate; 
• Probability of default (PD): This is the probability that an obligor or counterparty will default over a given 
period, usually one year.
• Loss given default (LGD): LGD is defined as the portion of the loan determined to be irrecoverable at the time of loan default (1 – recovery rate).
• Exposure at default (EAD ): This represents the amount that is outstanding at the point of default. Its 
estimation includes the drawn amount and expected utilization of the undrawn commitment at default.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021100
IFRS 9 Model
The IFRS 9 model has been built based on segmentation using business lines to reflect appropriate level of 
granularity based on business types. 
• The Corporate model was segmented based on industry sectors which depict similar risk profile and characteristics. 
• The Retail model was based on homogenous pool of cluster using product lines.
• The Investment model, mainly based on interbank placement, was also segmented into secured and unsecured products. The Treasury Bills and Government Bonds were zero risk weighted therefore attracted nil Expected Credit Loss. 
• The Off-Balance sheet items were modelled via Credit Conversion Factor (CCF) principle based on BoG Capital Requirement Directive.  The risk factor was applied to the off-balance sheet item to arrive at the credit equivalent amount of the exposure. Similarly, for contractual limits, the undrawn commitments CCF was 
modelled and applied to the undrawn portion to estimate the potential risk exposure. 
Impairment of loans is recognised on an individual or collective basis – in three stages under IFRS 9.
Stage 1 – When a loan is originated or purchased, ECLs resulting from default events that are possible within the 
next 12 months are recognised and a loss allowance is established.  On subsequent reporting dates, 12-month ECL also applies to existing loans with no significant increase in credit risk since their initial recognition. Interest revenue is calculated on the loan’s gross carrying amount.
Stage 2 – If a loan’s credit risk has increased significantly since initial recognition and is not considered low, 
lifetime ECLs are recognised. The calculation of interest revenue is the same as for Stage 1. 
Stage 3 – If the loan’s credit risk increases to the point where it is considered credit-impaired, interest revenue 
is calculated based on the loan’s amortised cost that is, the gross carrying amount less the loss allowance. Lifetime ECLs are recognised, as in Stage 2.
The ECL model incorporated forward looking information including reasonable and supportable forecasts of 
future economic conditions. Future cash flows and risk of default were also considered. The Bank considered 
three different scenarios for the model to mitigate non-linearity in the portfolio. The base, optimistic and 
pessimistic scenarios of macroeconomic conditions were used in estimating the probability of default. This was to ensure that the impairment estimates were not biased due to cyclicality of economic conditions. 
Early Alerts 
Corporate, Retail and Commercial Banking accounts are placed on early alert status when they display signs of weakness. Such accounts and portfolios are subject to a dedicated process of oversight involving Senior Risk Officers and Remedial Officers in the Loans Recovery Unit. The approach to Early Alerts monitoring include but 
not limited to: 
• Deterioration of the customer’s financial position;
• Delays by customers in settling their obligations; 
• Overdraft balances exceeding approved limits; and 
• Clear indications of the customer not being able to settle commitments on due dates. 
Customer payment plans are re-evaluated and remedial actions agreed and monitored until delinquency 
situations are resolved. Remedial actions include, but are not limited to, exposure reduction, security enhancement and movement of the account to the Loans Recovery Unit. Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 101
Write off policy 
The Bank writes off loans and advances balance (and any related allowances for impairment losses) when the 
Bank’s Credit Risk Management determines that the loans and advances are uncollectible. This determination is reached after considering information such as the occurrence of significant changes in the borrower’s financial 
position such that the borrower can no longer discharge the obligation, or that proceeds from collateral will not 
be sufficient to pay back the entire exposure. For smaller balance standardised loans, charge off decisions generally are based on a product specific past due status. Related and connected lending is not permitted to be 
written off unless with the approval of the Bank of Ghana and the Board of Directors.
Impairment (Prudential)
An account is considered to be in default when payment is not received on due date. Accounts that are overdue 
by more than 90 days are considered delinquent. These accounts are closely monitored and subjected to a collection process. The process used for impairment is based on Bank of Ghana guidelines which recognise cash 
as a credit mitigant. Individual impairments are made for outstanding amounts depending on the number of 
days past due with full impairment made after 360 days. In certain situations such as bankruptcy, fraud and death, the loss recognition process is accelerated. Loans and advances less than 90 days past due are generally not considered impaired unless other information is available to indicate otherwise. GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021102
The Bank of Ghana Guideline is as set out below:
Grade Description Number of days Impairment (%)
Current Less than 30 days 1
Other Loans Exceptionally Mentioned (OLEM) 30 to less than 90 days 10
Substandard 90 to less than 180 25
Doubtful 180 to less than 360 days 50
Loss 360 days and above 100
Credit quality
The Bank monitors credit risk per class of financial instrument. The table below outlines the classes identified, 
as well as the financial statement line item and the note that provides an analysis of the items included in the financial statement:
Class of financial instrument Financial statement line Note
Loans and advances at amortised cost Loans and advances 25
Debt investment securities at amortised Cost Investment securities 26
Debt investment securities at FVTOCI Investment securities 26
Other assets Other assets 31
Loan commitments and financial guarantee 
contractsContingent liabilities and commitments 37
An analysis of the Bank’s credit risk concentrations per class of financial asset is provided in the following tables. 
Unless specifically indicated, for financial assets, the amounts in the table represent gross carrying amounts. For loan commitments and financial guarantee contracts, the amounts in the table represent the amounts committed 
or guaranteed, respectively.
Loans and advances to customers at amortised cost
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2021 2020
Retail:
Personal Loan  1,648,988  1,122,774 
Corporate Employee Scheme 215,475  175,303 
SME 12,596  24,194 
Staff Loan 150,072  118,182 
Corporate:   
Agriculture, forestry & fishing  23,070  40,690 
Commerce & finance  922,267  850,780 
Construction 106,032  126,643 
Electricity, gas & water  191,268  152,494 
Manufacturing  321,168  323,436 
Mining & quarrying  96,734  96,124 
Services  1,366,594  1,111,359 
Transport, storage & communication  62,195  68,574 
Total 5,116,459 4,210,553Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 103
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2021 2020
Concentration by region
Europe - -
America - -
Middle East and Africa 5,116,459 4,210,553
Asia - -
Total 5,116,459 4,210,553
Investment
Concentration by Type
Sovereign 9,707,421  8,575,901 
Banking  189,031  189,031 
Total 9,896,452 8,764,932
Concentration by region
Europe - 12,423
Middle East and Africa 9,889,794 8,764,932
Total 9,889,794 8,764,932
An analysis of the Bank’s credit risk exposure per class of financial asset, internal rating and “stage” without 
taking into account the effects of any collateral or other credit enhancements is provided in the following tables. Unless specifically indicated, for financial assets, the amounts in the table represent gross carrying amounts. 
For loan commitments and financial guarantee contracts, the amounts in the table represent the amounts 
committed or guaranteed, respectively.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021104
Loans and Advances to Customers 
at Amortised costs Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3   2021 2020 
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total  Total 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
On Balance sheet
Grades 1-3: Low to fair risk 4,110,973 - - - 4,110,973  3,660,515 
Grades 4-6 Monitoring - 187,488 - - 187,488 84,548 
Grades 7-8: Substandard  -  - 129,460 -  129,460  149,354 
Grade 9: Doubtful  -  - 67,189 - 67,189  89,539 
Grade 10: Impaired  -  - 621,349 - 621,349 226,597 
Total gross carrying amount 4,110,973 187,488 817,998 -  5,116,459 4,210,553 
Loss allowance 65,036  49,164 661,174 -  775,374  575,923 
Interbank Placement
Grades 1-3: Low to fair risk  189,031  -  - - 189,031 189,031 
Grades 4-6 Monitoring  -  -  - - - - 
Grades 7-8: Substandard  -  -  - - - - 
Grade 9: Doubtful  -  -  - - - - 
Grade 10: Impaired  -  -  - - - - 
Total gross carrying amount 189,031 -  - - 189,031  189,031 
Loss allowance 2,926 -  - -  2,926 2,926 
Off Balance sheet
Grades 1-3: Low to fair risk 1,437,296 - - - 1,437,296 698,334 
Grades 4-6 Monitoring  -  -  - - - - 
Grades 7-8: Substandard  -  -  - - - - 
Grade 9: Doubtful  -  -  - - - - 
Grade 10: Impaired  -  - 6,388  - 6,388 - 
Total gross carrying amount 1,437,296 - 6,388 - 1,443,684  698,334 
Loss allowance  33,473  - 1,232 -  34,705  22,042 Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 105
This table summarises the loss allowance as of the year end by class of exposure/asset.
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2021 2020 
Class of exposure/asset
Loss allowance   
Loans and advances to customers at amortised cost 775,374 575,923 
Debt investment securities at amortised cost - - 
Inter-bank placements 2,926 2,926 
Off balance sheet 34,705 22,042 
Total 813,005 600,891 
The Bank did not recognise any other class of Purchased or Originally Credit Impaired (POCI) financial assets 
during the period. More information about the significant changes in the gross carrying amount of financial assets during the period that contributed to changes in the loss allowance is provided in the table below:
Loans and advances to customers at 
Amortised Cost Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3    
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
Gross carrying amount as at 01/01/20213,140,121 536,848 533,584  - 4,210,553 
Changes in the gross carrying amount  -  -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 1 20,870  (2,733) (18,137)  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 2  (21,118) 21,492  (374)  -  - 
 ––Transfer to stage 3  (55,198)  (17,516) 72,714  - - 
New financial assets originated or 
purchased 2,868,944  171,685 557,455  - 3,598,084 
Financial assets that have been derecognised (1,470,579)  (515,066) (192,153)  - (2,177,798)
Write off - - (112,666)  - (112,666) 
Other changes (372,067)  (7,222) (22,405)  - (401,694)
Gross carrying amount as at 31/12/20214,110,973  187,488 818,018  - 5,116,479 
Loss allowance as at 31/12/2021 65,036 49,164 661,174  - 775,374 GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021106
Loss allowance – Loans and Advances 
at amortised cost  Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3    
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Loss allowance as at 01/01/2021  76,830  111,414 387,680  -  575,924 
Changes in the loss allowance  -  -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 1 13,881  (765) (13,116)  -  - 
 ––Transfer to stage 2 (440)  699  (259)  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 3  (3,112)  (6,239) 9,351  - - 
 ––Increases due to change in credit risk  1,451  3,612 72,194  -  77,257 
Decreases due to change in credit risk  (24,253) (469)  (28,322)  -  (53,044)
Write-offs - - 27,020  - 27,020 
Changes due to modifications that did - -  -  - - 
not result in derecognition 5,813  36,318 172,664  - 214,795 
New financial assets originated or 
purchased  43,138 8,674 287,370  -  539,182 
Financial assets that have been derecognised  (47,624)  (104,080) (247,646)  -  (399,350)
Changes in models/risk parameters - -  -  - - 
Foreign exchange and other movements  (648)  - (5,762)  -  (6,410) 
 Loss allowance as at 31/12/2021 65,036 49,164 661,174  -  775,374
Interbank Placements at Amortised Cost Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3    
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
Gross carrying amount as at 01/01/2021 189,031  -  -  - 189,031 
Changes in the gross carrying amount 
 ––Transfer to stage 1 - -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 2 - -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 3 - -  -  - - 
 ––Changes due to modifications that did 
not result in derecognition - -  -  - - 
New financial assets originated or purchased - -  -  - - 
Financial assets that have been derecognised  - -  -  - -
Write off - -  -  - - 
Other changes - -  -  - - 
Gross carrying amount as at 31/12/2021 189,031 -  -  - 189,031 
Loss allowance as at 31/12/2021  2,926 -  -  - 2,926 Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 107
 Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3    
Loss allowance – Interbank placement 
at amortised cost 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Loss allowance as at 01/01/2021 2,926  - -  - 2,926
Changes in the loss allowance  -  -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 1 - -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 2  -  -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 3 - -  -  - - 
 ––Increases due to change in credit risk - -  -  -  -
Decreases due to change in credit risk - - -  - -
Write-offs - -  -  - - 
Changes due to modifications that did - -  -  - - 
not result in derecognition - -  -  - - 
New financial assets originated or 
purchased - - -  -  - 
Financial assets that have been 
derecognised - - -  - -
Changes in models/risk parameters - -  -  - - 
Foreign exchange and other movements - - -  -  - 
Loss allowance as at 31/12/2021 2,926 -  -  - 2,926 
Off Balance Sheet Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3    
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
Gross carrying amount as at 01/01/2021 695,713 1,569 1,052  - 698,334 
Changes in the gross carrying amount  -  -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 1 - -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 2 - -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 3 - -  -  - - 
 ––Changes due to modifications that did not result in derecognition - -  -  - - 
New financial assets originated or purchased  1,213,670 - 6,200  - 1,219,870 
Financial assets that have been derecognised  (474,935)  (1,569)  (864)  -  (477,368)
Write off - -  -  - - 
Other changes 2,848 - -  - 2,848 
Gross carrying amount as at 31/12/2021  1,437,296  - 6,388  - 1,443,684 
Loss allowance as at 31/12/2021  33,473 -  1,232  - 34,705 GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021108
Loss allowance – Off Balance Sheet Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3    
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Loss allowance as at 01/01/2021  21,034  243 765  - 22,042
Changes in the loss allowance  -  -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 1 - -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 2  -  -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 3 - -  -  - - 
 ––Increases due to change in credit risk - -  -  -  -
Decreases due to change in credit risk (512) - (137)  - (649)
Write-offs - -  -  - - 
Changes due to modifications that did - -  -  - - 
not result in derecognition - -  -  - - 
New financial assets originated or 
purchased 28,555 - 1,232  -  29,787 
Financial assets that have been 
derecognised  (16,074)  (243)  (628)  - (16,945)
Changes in models/risk parameters - -  -  - - 
Foreign exchange and other movements 470 - -  -  470 
 Loss allowance as at 31/12/2021 33,473 -  1,232  - 34,705 
Collateral held as security and other credit enhancements 
The Bank holds collateral or other credit enhancements to mitigate credit risk associated with financial assets. 
The Bank did not hold any financial instrument for which no loss allowance is recognised because of collateral at 31 December 2021. 
Personal lending
The Bank’s personal lending portfolio consists of secured and unsecured loans.
Corporate lending
The Group requests collateral and guarantees for corporate lending. The most relevant indicator of corporate customers’ creditworthiness is an analysis of their financial performance and their liquidity, leverage, management effectiveness and growth ratios. For this reason, the valuation of collateral held against corporate 
lending is not routinely updated. The valuation of such collateral is updated if the loan is put on the “watchlist” 
and is therefore monitored more closely.
For creditimpaired loans, the Group obtains appraisals of collateral to inform its credit risk management actions. The investment securities held by the Group are sovereign bonds and corporate bonds, which are not 
collateralised, as well as asset backed securities, which are secured by financial assets.
b). Liquidity risk management 
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will not be able to meet payment obligations associated with financial 
liabilities when they fall due and replace funds when they are withdrawn. The consequence may be the failure Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 109
to meet obligations to repay depositors and fulfil commitments to lend. It is the policy of the Group to maintain 
adequate liquidity at all times and to be in a position to meet all obligations, repay depositors, fulfil commitments to lend and meet any other commitments as and when they fall due.
The management of liquidity risk is governed by the Bank’s liquidity policy. Responsibility for the management 
of liquidity risk lies with the Bank’s Assets and Liability Management Committee (ALCO), which is chaired by an Executive Director. ALCO is responsible for both statutory and prudential liquidity as well as compliance with regulatory requirements. 
The primary objective of liquidity risk management is to provide a planning mechanism for unanticipated 
changes in demand or needs for liquidity created by customer behaviour or abnormal market conditions.
ALCO emphasizes the maximization and preservation of customer deposits and other funding sources. ALCO 
also monitors deposit rates, levels, trends and significant changes. 
Liquidity is managed on a short to medium-term basis. In the short term, the focus is on ensuring that cash flow 
demands can be met as and when required. The focus, in the medium term, is on ensuring that the balance 
sheet remains structurally sound and aligned to the Bank’s strategy. 
A substantial portion of the Bank’s assets are funded by customer deposits made up of current and savings 
accounts and other deposits. These customer deposits, which are widely diversified by type and maturity, 
represent a stable source of surplus funds. Lending is normally funded by liability in the same currency. 
The Bank also maintains significant levels of marketable securities to meet compliance with prudential 
investment of surplus funds. ALCO oversees structural foreign currency and interest rate exposures that arise within the Bank. These responsibilities are coordinated by ALCO during monthly meetings. The Bank places low reliance on interbank funding and foreign markets.
The key measure used by the Group for managing liquidity risk is the ratio of net liquid assets to deposits from 
customers. For this purpose, net liquid assets include cash and cash equivalents and investment securities for 
which there is an active and liquid market less any deposits from banks, debt securities issued, other borrowings and commitments maturing within the next month. Details of the reported Bank’s ratio of net liquid assets to deposits from customers at the reporting date and during the reporting period were as follows:
2021 2020
% %
At 31 December 58.39% 56.00%
Average for period 65.39% 81.00%
Maximum for period 75.21% 89.00%
Minimum for period 48.03% 67.00%
Maturity analysis for financial assets and liabilities  
The Group manages liquidity risk. The primary objective of liquidity risk management is to provide a planning mechanism for unanticipated changes in demand or needs for liquidity created by customer behaviour or abnormal market conditions.
The amounts disclosed in the table are the remaining contractual undiscounted cash flows which include 
estimated interest payment. GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021110
2021  
GroupUp to 1 
month1-3 months 3- 12 
months Over 1 year TotalCarrying 
Amount
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Financial liabilities by 
type 
Non-derivative liabilities      
Deposits from customers 2,582,711 3,105,940 6,017,676  2,195,790 13,902,117  13,902,117 
Borrowings 500,000  -  299,073  189,000 988,073  988,073 
Other liabilities 175,624 217,450 223,811 199,382  816,267  816,267 
Financial guarantee contracts41,721 9,608 865,147  -  916,476  916,476 
Unrecognised loan commitments19,490 12,699 479,210 134,027  645,426  645,426 
   3,319,546 3,345,697  7,884,917  2,718,199 17,268,359  17,268,359 
Financial assets by type 
Non-derivative assets  
Cash and cash equivalents  2,301,092  -  - -  2,301,092  2,301,092 
Advances to banks  - 11,999  - 189,031  201,030  201,030
Investment securities  218,667  661,313  1,279,637  7,606,223  9,765,840  9,765,840 
Trading assets  - 2,532  16,898  458,228  477,658 477,658 
Loans and advances to customers 708,802  575,114  988,010  2,034,454  4,306,380  4,306,380 
Investment (other than 
securities)  -  -  - 108,646 108,646 108,646 
Other assets  136,065  235,444 579,382 293,390 1,244,281 1,244,281 
Assets held for managing 
liquidity risk 3,364,626 1,486,402  2,863,927 10,689,972 18,404,927  
18,404,927 
Period liquidity gap 45,080 (1,859,295) (5,020,990) 7,971,773 1,136,568 1,136,568
2020
GroupUp to 1 
month 1-3 months 3- 12 
months Over 1 year TotalCarrying 
Amount
Financial liabilities by type  
Non-derivative liabilities      
Deposits from customers  2,378,933  2,806,614  4,637,589  2,137,522  11,960,658  11,960,658 
Borrowings  583,525  -  -  189,000  772,525  772,525 
Other liabilities  65,804  136,120  177,313  42,157  421,394  421,394 
Financial guarantee 
contracts -  6,969  374,049  -  381,018  381,018 
Unrecognised loan commitments  578  1,728  401  -  2,707  2,707 
 3,028,840  2,951,431  5,189,352  2,368,679  13,538,302  13,538,302 Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 111
2020
GroupUp to 1 
month 1-3 months 3- 12 
months Over 1 year TotalCarrying 
Amount
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Financial assets by type 
Non-derivative assets
Cash and cash equivalents  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Advances to banks  -  -  -  200,904  200,904  200,904 
Investment securities  1,446,287  695,667  1,403,616  5,077,276  8,622,846  8,622,846 
Trading assets  1,136  9,848  102,220  108,135  221,339  221,339 
Loans and advances to 
customers  733,794  432,458  996,946  1,449,390  3,612,588  3,612,588 
Investment (other than securities) -  -  -  -  -  - 
Other asset  128,956  101,710  191,627  40,407  462,700  462,700 
Assets held for managing liquidity risk  2,310,173  1,239,683  2,694,409  6,876,112  13,120,377  13,120,377 
Period liquidity gap  (718,667)  (1,711,748) (2,494,943) 4,507,433  (417,925)  (417,925) 
2021  
GroupUp to 1 
month1-3 months 3- 12 
months Over 1 year TotalCarrying 
Amount
Financial liabilities by type  
Non-derivative liabilities      
Deposits from customers  2,582,711 3,105,940  6,017,676  2,206,928  13,913,255  13,913,255 
Borrowings  500,000  -  299,073  189,000  988,073  988,073 
Other liabilities  175,624  217,450  223,811  195,036  811,921  811,921 
Financial guarantee contracts  41,721  9,608  865,147  -  916,476  916,476 
Unrecognised loan commitments  19,490  12,699  479,210  134,027  645,426  645,426 
 3,319,546 3,345,697  7,884,917  2,724,991  17,275,151  17,275,151 
Financial assets by type 
Non-derivative assets 
Cash and cash equivalents  2,301,092  -  -  -  2,301,092  2,301,092 
Advances to banks  -  11,999  -  189,031  201,030  201,030 
Investment securities  218,667  661,313  1,279,637  7,547,804  9,707,421  9,707,421 
Trading assets  -  2,532  16,898  458,228  477,658  477,658 
Loans and advances to customers 708,802  575,114  988,010  2,034,454  4,306,380  4,306,380 
"Investment (other than 
securities)”  -  -  -  33,053  33,053  33,053 
Other assets  136,065  235,444  579,382  282,756  1,233,647  1,233,647 
Assets held for managing 
liquidity risk  3,364,626 1,486,402  2,863,927  
10,545,326  18,260,281  
18,260,281 
Period liquidity gap  45,080 (1,859,295) (5,020,990) 7,820,335  985,130  985,130GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021112
2020
GroupUp to 1 
month1-3 
months 3- 12 
months Over 1 year TotalCarrying 
Amount
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Financial liabilities by type  
Non-derivative liabilities      
Deposits from customers  2,378,933  2,806,614  4,637,589  2,137,522  11,960,658  11,960,658 
Borrowings  583,525  -  -  189,000  772,525  772,525 
Other liabilities  65,248  136,675  177,314  42,344  421,581  421,581 
Financial guarantee 
contracts -  6,969  374,049  -  381,018  381,018 
Unrecognised loan commitments  578  1,728  401  -  2,707  2,707 
 3,028,284  2,951,986  5,189,353  2,368,866  13,538,489  13,538,489 
Financial asset by type 
Non-
derivative assets
Cash and cash equivalents  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Advances to banks  -  -  -  200,904  200,904  200,904 
Investment securities  1,491,869  695,667  1,403,616  4,984,749  8,575,901  8,575,901 
Trading assets  1,136  9,848  102,220  108,135  221,339  221,339 
Loans and advances to customers 733,794  432,458  996,946  1,449,390  3,612,588  3,612,588 
Investment (other than securities) -  -  -  -  -  - 
Other asset  128,956  101,710  194,639  35,127  460,432  460,432 
Asset held for managing liquidity risk  2,355,755  1,239,683  2,697,421  6,778,305  13,071,164  13,071,164 
Period liquidity gap  (672,529)  (1,712,303)  (2,491,932) 4,409,439  (467,325)  (467,325) 
The amounts in the table above have been compiled as follows:
• Nonderivative financial liabilities and financial assets – undiscounted cash flows, which include estimated 
interest payment
• Issued financial guarantee contracts, and unrecognised loan commitments – Earliest possible contractual maturity. For issued financial guarantee contracts, the maximum amount of the guarantee is allocated to the earliest period in which the guarantee could be called.
As part of the management of liquidity risk arising from financial liabilities, the Group holds liquid assets comprising cash and cash equivalents, and investments in government securities, which can be readily sold to meet liquidity requirements.
In the normal course of business, assets are sometimes pledged for specific purposes. The table below sets out 
the availability of the Group’s financial assets to support future funding.Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 113
GroupAvailable as 
collateralUnencumbered 
other* Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
31 Dec 2021
Cash and cash equivalents  2,301,092  -  2,301,092 
Loans and advances to customers  -  4,306,253  4,306,253 
Advances to banks  201,030  -  201,030 
Investment securities  9,765,840  -  9,765,840 
Trading assets  477,658  -  477,658 
Investment (other than investment securities)  108,646  -  108,646 
Total assets  12,854,266  4,306,253  17,160,519 
Group
31 Dec 2020
Cash and cash equivalents"  1,567,241  -  1,567,241 
Loans and advances to customers  -  3,612,588  3,612,588 
Advances to banks  200,904  -  200,904 
Investment securities  8,622,846  -  8,622,846 
Trading assets  221,339  -  221,339 
Investment (other than investment securities)  110,215  -  110,215 
Total assets  10,722,545  3,612,588  14,335,133 
BankAvailable as 
collateralUnencumbered 
other* Total
31 Dec 2021Cash and cash equivalents  2,301,092  -  2,301,092 
Loans and advances to customers  -  4,306,253  4,306,253 
Advances to banks  201,030  -  201,030 
Investment securities  9,707,421  -  9,707,421 
Trading assets  477,658  -  477,658 
Investment (other than investment securities)  33,053  -  33,053 
Total assets  12,720,254  4,306,253  17,026,507 
Bank
31 Dec 2020
Cash and cash equivalents  1,567,241  -  1,567,241 
Loans and advances to customers  -  3,612,588  3,612,588 
Advances to banks  200,904  -  200,904 
Investment securities  8,575,901  -  8,575,901 
Trading assets  221,339  -  221,339 
Investment (other than investment securities)  31,607  -  31,607 
Total assets  10,596,992  3,612,588 14,209,580 
*Represents assets that are not restricted for use as collateral, but the Group would not consider them as readily 
available to secure funding in the normal course of business.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021114
Financial assets pledged as collateral
The Group pledged GHS 968.9m (2020: GHS 907.2m) of its investments in Government securities as collateral 
to Bank of Ghana, UBA Bank, Fidelity Bank, First National Bank, Omni Bank and SG Bank. The Group has not received collateral that it is permitted to sell or repledge in the absence of default.
c) Market Risk 
Management of Market Risk 
The Group takes on exposure to market risk, which is the risk of potential loss of earnings or economic value 
due to adverse changes in financial market rates or prices. Market risks arise from open positions in interest rates, currency and equity products, all of which are exposed to general and specific market movements and 
changes in the level of volatility of market rates or prices such as interest rates, credit spreads, foreign exchange 
rates and equity prices. The Group’s exposure to market risk arises principally from customer-driven transactions and pension obligations.
Foreign Exchange Exposure 
Foreign exchange or currency risk is the risk of loss that results from changes in foreign exchange rates. The Bank’s exposure to foreign currency risk is limited to non-trading book and is strictly controlled by the Treasury and Risk Management units. Non-trading book refers to the assets of the Bank that are not traded or held with 
the intent of trading. The Group’s foreign exchange exposures are principally derived from customer-driven 
transactions.
EUR USD GBP
At 31 December 2021 ‘000 ‘000 ‘000
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents 10,389 11,594 4,100 
Advances to banks - 528 -
Loans and advances to customers - 214,884 -
Total Assets  10,389 227,006 4,100 
LiabilitiesDeposits due to customers 15,132 213,837 5,899 
Total liabilities 15,132 213,837 5,899
Net on balance sheet position (4,743) 13,169 (1,799) 
Off balance sheet credit commitments 6,940 181,711 26,700
Total Exposure 2,197 194,880 24,901Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 115
The Group and The Bank EUR USD GBP
At 31 December 2020 ‘000 ‘000 ‘000
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents  9,571  16,262  6,606 
Advances to banks  -  500  - 
Loans and advances to customers  -  154,964  - 
Total assets  9,571  171,726  6,606 
LiabilitiesDeposits from customers  7,787  155,238  5,737 
Total liabilities  7,787  155,238  5,737 
Net on-balance sheet position  1,784  16,488  869 
Off-balance sheet credit commitments  29,679  419,092  - 
Total exposure  31,463  435,580  869 
The following mid interbank exchange rates were applied during the year:
Average Rate Reporting Rate
GHS to 2021 2020 2021 2020
USD 1 5.8177 5.5982 6.0061 5.7602
EUR 1 6.8654 7.1864 6.8281 7.0643
GBP 1 7.9962 6.3906 8.1272 7.8742
Foreign Exchange Sensitivity
The following table shows the effect of a strengthening or weakening of GHS against the currencies listed below 
on profit or loss and equity. This sensitivity analysis indicates the potential impact on profit or loss and equity 
based on foreign currency exposures recorded at 31 December (See “currency risk” above).
It does not represent actual or future gains or losses.A strengthening/weakening of the GHS by the rates shown in the table against the following currencies at 
31 December would have impacted equity and profit or loss by the amounts shown below:
This analysis assumes that all other variables, in particular interest rates, remain constant. The analysis is 
performed on the same basis for 2020.
As at 31 Dec 2021 2020
In GHS % ChangeProfit or loss 
impact:
StrengtheningEquity impact:
Strengthening % ChangeProfit or loss 
impact:
StrengtheningEquity impact
Strengthening
USD ±1 25,292 25,292 ±1 25,090 25,090 
EUR ±1 2,148 2,148 ±1 2,223 659 
GBP ±1  69  69 ±1  68  68 
A 1% weakening of the GHS against the above currencies at 31 December would have had an equal but opposite 
effect.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021116
Interest Rate Risk 
Interest rate exposure 
Interest rate risk is the risk that future cash flows or fair values of a financial instrument will fluctuate because 
of changes in market interest rates. The Group is exposed to the effects of fluctuations in the prevailing levels of market interest rates on both fair value and cash flow risks. Interest margins may increase as a result of such 
changes, which may cause losses to be incurred, in the event of unexpected movements. 
The Asset and Liability Management (“ALM”) process, managed through ALCO, is used to manage interest rate 
risks associated with the non-trading book. Gap analysis is used in measuring interest rate risk. It compares the values of interest rate sensitive assets and liabilities that mature or are re-priced at various time periods in the future. Subjective judgment/assumptions are made about the behaviour of assets and liabilities which do not have specific contractual maturity or re-pricing dates.
Interest rate risk evaluates potential volatility to net interest income caused by changes in market interest rates 
and represents the most significant market risk exposure to the Group’s non-trading book. The management of interest rate risk against interest rate gap limits is supplemented by monitoring sensitivity of the Group’s financial assets and liabilities to various standard and non-standard interest rate scenarios.
Group 
At 31 December 2021Up to 1 
month 1-3 months 3- 12 months Over 1 year Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Assets
Investment securities  218,667  661,313  1,279,637  7,606,223  9,765,840 
Non-Pledged trading assets  -  2,532  16,898  458,228  477,658 
Advances to banks  -  11,999  -  189,031  201,030 
Loans and advances to 
customers  708,802  575,114  988,010  2,034,454  4,306,380 
Total financial assets  927,469  1,250,958  2,284,545  10,287,936  14,750,908 
Liabilities
Interest bearing deposits  2,461,258  2,987,199  5,189,604  2,089,695  12,727,756 
Borrowings  500,000  -  299,073  189,000  988,073 
Total financial liabilities  2,961,258  2,987,199  5,488,677  2,278,695  13,715,829 
Total interest rate gap  (2,033,789)  (1,736,241)  (3,204,132)  8,009,241  1,035,079 
2020 Group
Assets
Investment securities  1,666,980  752,867  1,403,616  4,799,383  8,622,846 
Trading assets  1,136  9,848  102,220  108,135  221,339 
Advances to banks  -  -  -  200,904  200,904 
Loans and advances to 
customers 733,794  432,458  996,945  1,449,390  3,612,587 
Total financial assets  2,401,910  1,195,173  2,502,781  6,557,812  12,657,676 Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 117
Group 
At 31 December 2021Up to 1 
month 1-3 months 3- 12 months Over 1 year Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
LiabilitiesInterest bearing deposits  2,386,211  2,806,614  4,637,589  2,137,522  11,967,936 
Borrowings  583,525  -  -  189,000  772,525 
Total financial liabilities  2,969,736  2,806,614  4,637,589  2,326,522  12,740,461 
Total interest gap  (567,826)  (1,611,441)  (2,134,808)  4,231,290  (82,785)
Bank
At 31 December 2021Up to 1 
month 1-3 months 3- 12 months Over 1 year Total
Assets
Investment securities  218,667  661,313  1,279,637  7,547,804  9,707,421 
Non-Pledged Trading Assets  -  2,532  16,898  458,228  477,658 
Advances to banks  -  11,999  -  189,031  201,030 
Loans and advances to 
customers  708,802  575,114  988,010  2,034,454  4,306,380 
Total financial assets  927,469  1,250,958  2,284,545  10,229,517  14,692,489 
Liabilities
Interest bearing deposits  2,461,258  2,987,199  5,189,604  2,089,695  12,727,756 
Borrowings  500,000  -  299,073  189,000  988,073 
Total financial liabilities  2,961,258  2,987,199  5,488,677  2,278,695  13,715,829 
Total interest rate gap  (2,033,789)  (1,736,241)  (3,204,132)  7,950,822  976,660 
2020 Bank
Assets
Investment securities  1,621,387  752,867  1,403,616  4,798,031  8,575,901 
Trading assets  1,136  9,848  102,220  108,135  221,339 
Advances to banks  -  -  -  200,904  200,904 
Loans and advances to 
customers 733,794  432,458  996,946  1,449,390  3,612,588 
Total financial assets  2,356,317  1,195,173  2,502,782  6,556,460  12,610,732 
Liabilities
Interest bearing deposits  2,386,211  2,806,614  4,637,589  2,137,522  11,967,936 
Borrowings  583,525  -  -  189,000  772,525 
Total financial liabilities  2,969,736  2,806,614  4,637,589  2,326,522  12,740,461 
Total interest rate gap  (613,419)  (1,611,441)  (2,134,807)  4,229,938  (129,729)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021118
Analysis of the Group’s sensitivity to market interest
Standard scenarios that are considered on a monthly basis include a 200 basis point (bp) parallel fall or rise in 
market interest rates. A change of a 200 basis points in interest rates at the reporting date would have impacted equity and profit or loss by the amounts shown below:
Group 2021 2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Increase Decrease Increase Decrease 
Interest income impact 295,016 (295,016)  21,096 (21,096)
Interest expense impact  (274,317) 274,317  (21,234) 21,234 
Net impact 20,699 (20,699)  (138) 138 
Bank 2021 2020
Increase Decrease Increase Decrease 
Interest income impact 293,847 (293,847)  21,018 (21,018)
Interest expense impact (274,317) 274,317  (21,234) 21,234 
Net impact 19,530 (19,530)   (216) 216 
Market risk monitoring and control  
The Risk Management Division (RMD) is responsible for monitoring the Bank’s exposure to market risk. The analysis of impact of unlikely but plausible events by means of scenario analysis enables management to gain a better understanding of risks that the Bank is potentially exposed to under adverse conditions.
d)   Operational risk
Operational risk is the risk of direct or indirect loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, systems or human factors, or from external events. Operational risk is inherent in the Group’s business activities and, as with other risk types, is managed through an overall framework designed to balance strong corporate 
oversight with well-defined independent risk management. The Group endeavours to minimize operational 
losses by ensuring that effective infrastructure, controls, systems and individuals are in place throughout the organization. 
Operational Risk Framework 
To monitor, mitigate and control operational risk, the Group maintains a system of policies and has established a framework for assessing and communicating operational risks as well as the overall effectiveness of the internal control environment across business lines. Each major business segment is expected to implement an 
operational risk process consistent with the requirements of this framework. The process for operational risk 
management includes the following steps: 
• identify and assess key operational risks; 
• establish key risk indicators; 
• produce comprehensive operational risk reports; and 
• prioritize and ensure adequate resources to actively improve the operational risk environment and mitigate emerging risks. 
The operational risk standards facilitate the effective communication and mitigation actions both within and across businesses. The Group is committed to continuously enhancing its operational risk framework to 
encourage a culture of effective accountability and responsibility .Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 119
e)  Compliance and regulatory risk
Compliance and Regulatory risk includes the risk of non-compliance with regulatory requirements. The Group’s 
Compliance Department is responsible for establishing and maintaining an appropriate framework for the Group’s compliance with policies and procedures. Compliance with such policies and procedures is the 
responsibility of all managers. However, the Compliance Unit monitors and reports on compliance to Executive 
Management and the Board. The Group generally complied with regulatory requirements.
f)   Capital management
The Group’s policy is to maintain a strong capital base so as to maintain investor and market confidence and sustain future development of the business. The impact of the level of capital on shareholders’ return is also taken into consideration in addition to security afforded by sound capital positions. The Bank complied with the 
statutory capital requirements throughout the period under review. The subsidiary is not subject to externally 
imposed capital requirements. 
Capital adequacy and the use of regulatory capital are monitored daily by management, employing techniques 
based on guidelines developed by the Basel Committee as implemented by Bank of Ghana for supervisory 
purposes. The required information is filed with Bank of Ghana on a monthly basis. Bank of Ghana requires each 
bank to: 
• Hold a minimum regulatory capital of GHS 400 million; and 
• Maintain a ratio of total regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets plus risk weighted off balance sheet assets above a required minimum of 10%. 
The Bank generally complied with all externally imposed capital requirements. 
The Bank’s capital is divided into two tiers: 
• Tier 1 capital includes ordinary paid up capital and disclosed reserves, excluding the value of assets such 
as investment in other banks and financial institutions.
• Tier 2 capital is made up of reserves such as unrealized gains on equity instruments classified as fair value through other comprehensive income. 
Non-risk weighted assets are classified as cash on hand, claims on government and claims on the Central Bank. 
Risk-weighted assets are determined according to specified requirements that seek to reflect the varying levels 
of risk attached to assets and off -balance sheet exposures.
2021 2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Tier 1 Capital
Stated capital ordinary  500,000  500,000  500,000  500,000 
Statutory reserve  639,555  639,555  569,971  569,971 
Retained earnings  1,434,337  1,547,835  1,013,504  1,111,387 
Intangible/other assets  (167,999)  (168,226)  (190,921)  (190,921)
Deferred tax assets  (237,927)  (238,171)  (157,455)  (158,465)
Investments in capital of other Banks and financial 
/ other institutions” (33,054)  (99,081)  (31,607)  (101,759)
Total qualifying tier 1 capital  2,134,912  2,181,912  1,703,492  1,730,213 
Tier 2 Capital
Fair value reserves  (106)  14,997  (1,754)  5,395 
Other reserves  (26,754)  (3,916)  (32,429)  (755)
Total qualifying tier 2 capital  (26,860)  11,081  (34,183)  4,640 
Total regulatory capital  2,108,052  2,192,993  1,669,309  1,734,853 GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021120
2021 2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Risk profile
Total credit risk equivalent weighted asset (RWA)  6,354,165  6,364,329  5,155,357  5,158,266 
Total operational risk equivalent weighted asset 
(RWA) 3,597,938  3,597,938  2,858,536  2,858,536 
Total market risk equivalent weighted asset (RWA)  133,814  133,814  62,725  62,725 
Total RWA  10,085,917  10,096,081  8,076,618  8,079,527 
Regulatory Quantitative Disclosures
Capital Adequacy Ratio 20.90% 21.72% 20.67% 21.51%
Non-Performing Loans Ratio 15.98% 15.98% 8.71% 8.71%
Liquid Ratio 64% 65% 64% 65%
Compliance with Statutory Liquidity(i) Default in Statutory Liquidity  220  220 
 183  183 
(ii) Default in Statutory Sanction Nil Nil Nil Nil
The Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) has been computed in accordance with the Capital Requirement Directive 
(CRD) by Bank of Ghana. The CRD was developed and issued by Bank of Ghana for the adoption of all banks in Ghana. It is based on the Basel II and III frameworks.
Non- performing loans 
2021 2020
Non-Performing Loans (Sub-standard to Loss) 817,997 366,916
NPL Ratio (Non-performing loans/ total gross loans) 15.98% 8.71%
g)  Renegotiated loans which have been reclassified
Loans renegotiated and reclassified during the year amounted to GHS 640,665,509.25
h) Amount of repossessed properties/collateral
No collaterals were repossessed during the year. (2020: Nil)
i)  Statutory breaches and non-compliance with other prudential requirements;
The Bank recorded a liquidity breach during the period under review. The bank was levied a penalty of GHS 220,047.18 due to the breach.
7.  Fair values of financial instruments 
The fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities that are traded in active markets are based on quoted market prices or dealer price quotations. For all other financial instruments, the Group determines fair values using other valuation techniques.
For financial instruments that trade infrequently and have little price transparency, fair value is less objective, 
and require varying degrees of judgment depending on liquidity, concentration, uncertainty of market factors, 
pricing assumptions and other risks affecting the specific instrument.Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 121
(a) Valuation models
The Group measures fair values using the following fair value hierarchy, which reflects the significance of inputs 
used in making the measurements.
The objective of valuation techniques is to arrive at a fair value measurement that reflects the price that would 
be received to sell the asset or paid to transfer the liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. 
The Group uses widely recognised valuation models for determining the fair value of common and more simple 
financial instruments that use only observable market data and require little management judgment and estimation.
Availability of observable market prices and model inputs reduces the need for management judgment and 
estimation and also reduces the uncertainty associated with determining fair values. Availability of observable 
market prices and inputs varies depending on the products and markets and is prone to changes based on specific events and general conditions in the financial markets.
b) Valuation framework
The objective of a fair value measurement is to estimate the price at which an orderly transaction to sell the asset or transfer the liability would take place between market participants at the measurement date under current market conditions. A fair value measurement requires an entity to determine all the following:
• The particular asset or liability that is the subject of measurement (consistently with the unit of account);
• The principal (or most advantageous) market for the asset or liability;
• The valuation technique(s) appropriate for the measurement, considering the availability of data with which to develop inputs that represent the assumptions that market participants would use when pricing the asset or liability and the level of the fair value hierarchy within which the inputs are categorized.   
                 2021        2020
                 Level 1  Level 1
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Investment in equity securities AFS 3,196 4,903 1,895 2,994
Investment securities  FVTPL 477,658 477,658 223,234 221,339
480,854 482,561 225,129 224,333
                2021  2020
                Level 3  Level 3
Bank Group Bank Group
Investment in unlisted equity securities 584 22,861 438 15,540
584 22,861 438 15,540
Valuation Technique
The Income approach was used for the valuation of the unlisted equities. The Dividend Growth and the Book Value methods specifically were adopted for the purposes of the valuation.
Main inputs and assumptions 
Level 2 and level 3 inputs were deployed in the valuation.
The following information were used:
• Dividend Income of the entities being valued.
• Beta of all shares listed on the GSE from the Bloomberg Terminal. The average beta for entities similar to the 
ones being valued was used to value the respective investee company.
• The 20-year Government of Ghana Bond rate of 21.82% was used as the discount rate.
• Market  rate of return, using the GSE Composite Index as a proxy.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021122
7 i.   Financial instruments not measured at fair value
The carrying amount of the financial instruments not measured at fair value approximate their fair values.
7 ii. Classification of financial assets and financial liabilities
Accounting classifications and fair values
The table below sets out the Group’s classification of each class of financial assets and liabilities. Fair value is the 
price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date in the principal or, in its absence, the most advantageous market 
to which the Group has access at that date.
BankFair value 
through 
profit or lossAmortised 
costFair value 
through OCIFinancial 
liabilitiesTotal 
carrying 
amount
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
31 December, 2021
Cash and cash equivalents  -  2,301,092  -  -  2,301,092 
Investment securities  -  9,707,421  -  -  9,707,421 
Trading Assets  477,658  -  -  -  477,658 
Advances to banks  -  201,030  -  -  201,030 
Loans and advances to 
customers  -  4,306,381  -  -  4,306,381 
Investments (other than investment securities)  -  -  3,779  -  3,779 
Other assets  -  527,263  -  -  527,263 
Total assets  477,658  17,043,187  3,779  17,524,624  17,524,624 
Deposits from banks & other financial institutions -  -  -  747,589  747,589 
Deposits from customers  -  -  -  13,165,666  13,165,666 
Other liabilities  -  -  -  643,878  643,878 
Borrowings  -  -  -  988,073  988,073 
Total liabilities  -  -  -  15,545,206  15,545,206 Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 123
BankFair value 
through profit 
or lossAmortised 
costFair value 
through OCIFinancial 
liabilitiesTotal 
carrying 
amount
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
31 December, 2020
Cash and cash equivalents  -  1,567,241  -  -  1,567,241 
Investment securities  -  8,575,901  -  -  8,575,901 
Trading assets  221,339  -  -  -  221,339 
Advances to banks  -  200,904  -  -  200,904 
Loans and advances to 
customers  -  3,612,588  -  -  3,612,588 
Investment (other than 
investment securities)  -  -  2,333  -  2,333 
Other assets  -  460,432  -  -  460,432 
Total assets  221,339  14,417,066  2,333  -  14,640,738 
Deposits from banks & other 
financial institutions  -  -  -  615,418  615,418 
Deposits from customers  -  -  -  11,352,518  11,352,518 
Other liabilities  -  -  -  421,581  421,581 
Borrowings  -  -  -  772,525  772,525 
Total liabilities  -  -  -  13,162,042  13,162,042 
GroupFair value 
through 
profit or lossAmortised 
costFair value 
through OCIFinancial 
liabilitiesTotal 
carrying 
amount
31 December, 2021
Cash and cash equivalents  -  2,314,179  -  -  2,314,179 
Investment securities  -  9,765,840  -  -  9,765,840 
Trading Assets  476,870  -  -  -  476,870 
Advances to banks  -  201,030  -  -  201,030 
Loans and advances to 
customers  -  4,306,381  -  -  4,306,381 
Investments (other than investment securities)  -  -  26,366  -  26,366 
Other assets  -  536,553  -  -  536,553 
Total assets  476,870  17,123,983  26,366  -  17,627,220 
Deposits from banks & other financial institutions -  -  -  747,589  747,589 
Deposits from customers  -  -  -  13,165,666  13,165,666 
Other liabilities  -  -  -  648,225  648,225 
Borrowings  -  -  -  988,073  988,073 
Total liabilities  -  -  -  15,549,553  15,549,553 GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021124
GroupFair value 
through profit 
or lossAmortised 
costFair value 
through OCIFinancial 
liabilitiesTotal 
carrying 
amount
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
31 December, 2020
Cash and cash equivalents  -  1,567,241  -  -  1,567,241 
Investment securities  -  8,622,846  -  -  8,622,846 
Trading assets  221,339  -  -  -  221,339 
Advances to banks  -  200,904  -  -  200,904 
Loans and advances to 
customers  -  3,612,588  -  -  3,612,588 
Investment (other than 
investment securities)  -  -  18,534  -  18,534 
Other assets  -  462,701  -  -  462,701 
Total  221,339  14,466,280  18,534  -  14,706,153 
Deposits from banks & other 
financial institutions  -  -  -  615,418  615,418 
Deposits from customers  -  -  -  11,345,240  11,345,240 
Other liabilities  -  -  -  421,395  421,395 
Borrowings  -  -  -  772,525  772,525 
Total liabilities  -  -  -  13,154,578  13,154,578 
8.  Operating segments
a.    Segment information
For performance management purposes, the Bank is organized into 4 core segments based on their products 
and services. These are:
• Retail Banking;
• Corporate Banking; 
• Treasury; and
• Commercial Banking
The Retail Banking arm of the business concentrates mainly on individual customers and therefore provides the required platform to enhance service delivery to that segment. The coverage of this function also extends to 
sole proprietorships and very small and medium scale enterprises.
Corporate Banking is responsible for the top tier the Business Banking customer profile. The function is 
subcategorized into Multinational Corporate, Large Local Corporate, Development Organizations and Public Sector. Depending on customer profiling, clients of this function are mostly relationship managed with a few of them managed on portfolio basis.
The Treasury function provides the expertise and platform for the centralized management of the Group’s 
market risk exposures. The function manages the funding requirements and ensures that the Bank is well capitalized to boost investor confidence and sustain future development of the business.
The Commercial Banking arm of the business provides banking services by way of financing and raising deposit 
as well as providing trade services to these small scale clients.Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 125
For the purpose of segmental reporting, surplus funds or deficit per business unit is either sold to or purchased 
from the Bank pool based on a pool rate determined by Treasury using the Group’s incremental cost of funds for both local and foreign currencies.
Management monitors the operating results of business segments separately for the purpose of making 
decisions about capital allocation and for assessing performance. Segment performance is evaluated based on operating profit or loss together with the underlying balance sheet position for the reporting period. To be able to assess each of the three businesses in a fairer and consistent manner, common corporate operating expenses 
are allocated to segments based on an established costsharing policy that permits a reasonable and consistent 
allocation of central management expenses.
31 Dec 2021 Retail Corporate Treasury Commercial Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
External RevenueNet interest income  167,636  86,377  1,610,796  20,028  1,884,837 
Inter-segment revenue  592,492  191,044  (924,808)  141,272  - 
Net fees and commission 
income  213,667  73,084  11,266  41,642  339,659 
Net trading income  -  11,357  136,216  9,967  157,540 
Other income/other revenue  805  10,419  3,029  (4,677)  9,576 
Total segment revenue  974,600  372,281  836,499  208,232  2,391,612 
Operating expenses  (650,527)  (240,398)  (145,560)  (220,522)  (1,257,007)
Other material non-cash 
items: -  -  -  -  - 
Impairment loss on loans and advances  (11,994)  (259,279)  -  (53,527)  (324,800)
Reportable segmental profit before tax 312,079  (127,396)  690,939  (65,817)  809,805 
Reportable segment assets  1,840,728  2,191,964  12,253,757  273,561  16,560,010 
Reportable segment liabilities  7,442,431  4,638,910  925,573  1,899,414  14,906,328 
31 Dec 2020 Retail Corporate Treasury Commercial Total
External revenue
Net interest income  116,531  148,955  1,187,565  46,835  1,499,886 
Inter-segment revenue  563,494  123,714  (825,521)  138,313  - 
Net fees and commissions  160,843  60,177  10,161  32,813  263,994 
Net trading income  -  11,485  149,890  5,253  166,628 
Other income / other revenue  1,167  2,223  2,589  1,621  7,600 
Total segment revenue  842,035  346,554  524,684  224,835  1,938,108 
Operating expenses  (593,876)  (211,361)  (122,717)  (188,619)  (1,116,572)
Other material non-cash 
items: -  -  -  -  - 
Impairment loss on loans and advances  (22,339)  (166,905)  (310)  (30,093)  (219,647)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021126
31 Dec 2020 Retail Corporate Treasury Commercial Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Reportable segmental profit 
before tax 225,820  (31,712)  401,657  6,123  601,889 
Reportable segment assets  1,302,425  1,603,082  10,695,466  577,000  14,177,973 
Reportable segment liabilities  6,791,322  3,288,267  773,340  1,887,531  12,740,460 
b.    Reconciliations of information on reportable segment
i. Assets
2021 2020 
Total assets for reportable entities  16,560,010  14,177,973 
Unallocated amounts  1,711,749  1,146,683 
Total assets  18,271,759  15,324,656 
ii. Liabilities
2021 2020
Total liabilities for reportable entities  14,906,328  12,740,460 
Unallocated amounts  801,945  534,904 
Total liabilities  15,708,273  13,275,364 
c. Geographic information
In Ghana Outside Ghana Total
2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020
Revenues 2,391,612 1,937,702  -   405 2,391,612 1,938,107
No individual customer contributed 10% or more to revenue. Segment revenue is based on the geographical 
location of customers, whilst segment asset is based on the geographical location of assets.
In Ghana Outside Ghana Total
2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020
Non-current assets
Property, equipment and right 
-of- use asset 301,332 280,013  -    -   301,332 280,013
Intangible assets 168,225 190,921  -    -   168,225 190,921
Total 469,557 470,934  -    -   469,557 470,934Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 127
9.  Interest income
                 2021        2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Cash and short term funds 31,607 31,603 77,630 77,656
Investment securities 1,598,704 1,608,621 1,147,094 1,155,835
Loans and advances to customers739,146 739,146 705,417 705,417
2,369,457 2,379,370 1,930,141 1,938,908
10.  Interest expense
                 2021        2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost
Current and savings accounts 205,144 205,144 168,318 168,318
Time and other deposits227,631 227,631 199,535 199,535
Borrowings51,845 51,752 62,402 62,357
484,620 484,527 430,255 430,210
11.  Fee and commission income
                 2021        2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Commission on letters of credit and guarantees 15,366 15,366 10,052 10,052
Commission on foreign services 30,594 30,594 25,701 25,701
Commission on turnover55,328 55,326 51,527 51,527
Processing and facility fees68,462 68,462 41,955 41,955
Other fees and commissions (Note 11.1) 220,658 240,529 186,481 200,467
Total Fee and Commission Income 390,408 410,277 315,716 329,702
11.1 Other fees and commissions include earnings from payment orders, bancassurance, mobile financial services 
and money transfers.
12.  Fee and commission expense
                 2021        2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Direct cost of services 50,749 50,749 51,722 51,722
Total 50,749 50,749 51,722 51,722
13.  Net trading income
                 2021        2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Foreign exchange 84,983 84,983 95,835 95,835
Fixed income trading 72,557 72,557 70,793 70,793
157,540 157,540 166,628 166,628
Other foreign exchange differences arising on non-trading activities are taken to other operating income/expense in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021128
14.  Other operating income
                 2021        2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Dividend income 571 6578 702 7,476
Bad debt recoveries 584 584 125 125
Claims against operational loss  7,575  7,575 6,774 6,774
Rental income 709 708 434 434
Profit/(Loss) on sale of property and equipment 137 137 (435) (435)
9,576 15,582 7,600 14,374
15.   Net impairment loss on financial assets
                 2021        2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Impairment charge 324,800 324,800 219,647 219,647
Analysis of impairment charge
Allowance for impairment – Advances to banks  -  -  (4,941)  (4,941)
Allowance for impairment – loans and advances  324,800  324,800  224,588  224,588 
 324,800  324,800  219,647  219,647 
16.  Other expenses 
             2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Technology and communication 149,045 149,045 123,153 123,153 
Advertising and marketing 7,598 7,598 11,307 11,307 
Training 4,794 4,794 1,446 1,447 
Audit and other related fees 1,980 2,050 1,610 1,681 
Donations 2,331 2,331 10,182 10,184 
Utilities 24,831 24,857 20,253 20,253 
Other professional fees 74,055 75,328 52,108 52,108 
Rent and rates 7,330 7,340 6,105 6,105 
Repairs and maintenance 15,863 15,889 22,183 22,183 
Security services 17,318 17,318 16,665 16,665 
Travelling 2,735 2,739 2,926 2,926 
Business promotion 2,515 2,515 10,012 10,012 
Settlement of legal cases (2,412) (2,412) 2,065 2,065 
Other administrative expenses 163,537 164,333 134,140 144,959 
471,520 473,725 414,155 425,048 Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 129
17.  Personnel expenses 
                 2021        2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Staff expense comprise:
Wages and salaries  229,530  233,603  218,381  220,272 
Staff allowances  190,748  190,748  168,466  168,466 
Performance award  100,217  100,217  59,626  59,626 
Social security fund contributions  29,802  29,802  27,466  27,466 
Provident fund contributions  27,959  27,959  25,672  25,672 
Retirement benefit obligations  20,995  20,995  23,968  23,968 
Restructuring cost  96  96  1,752  1,752 
Other staff costs  35,430  35,471  31,000  31,013 
Directors fees  2,539  2,664  3,619  3,698 
 637,316  641,555  559,950  561,933 
The number of persons employed by the Goup at the year-end was 2,316 (2020:2,354)
18.  Income tax expense
Amount recognised in profit or loss 2021 2020
  Bank Group Bank Group
Current tax expense     
Corporate tax  261,416  267,969 191,501 194,506
National Fiscal Stabilisation Levy 40,490 40,490 30,095 30,095
Financial Sector Recovery Levy 30,368 30,368 - -
  332,374  338,827 221,596 224,601
Deferred tax expense (79,136)  (79,133)   (59,208)    (59,164)   
Total income tax expense 253,138  259,694 162,388 165,437
Reconciliation of the tax expense
The tax charge on the Group and Bank’s profit before tax differs from the theoretical amount that would 
arise using the basic tax rate as follows:
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Profit before tax  809,805  842,372  601,889  610,826 
Corporate tax rate 25% 25% 25% 25%
National fiscal stabilisation levy rate 5% 5% 5% 5%
Financial sector recovery levy rate 5% 5% 5% 5%
Tax calculated at corporate tax rate  202,451  210,593  150,472  152,706 
Deductible Income  (19,680)  (19,639)  (17,166)  (17,123)
Tax exempt income  (313)  (2,701)  (245)  (48)
Income subject to tax at different rate  -  761  (864)  (864)
Tax incentive  (178)  (178)  96  671 
National fiscal stabilisation levy  40,490  40,490  30,095  30,095 GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021130
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Financial Sector Stabilization Levy  30,368  30,368  -  - 
Current income tax charge  253,138  259,694  162,388  165,437 
Effective tax rate 31.26% 30.83% 26.98% 27.08%
19.  Current tax (assets) / liabilities
Group 
2021Balance at 
1 January Charge for 
the year Payment Balance at 
31 December 
Year of assessment
Up to 2020 (34,087) - -  (34,087)
2021 - 267,969 (196,497) 71,472
National fiscal stabilization levy 8,350 40,490 (34,443) 14,398
Financial Sector Recovery Levy - 30,368 (25,832) 4,536
Tax adjustment related to prior year (2018 tax 
audit report)  (71) - - (71)
 (25,808) 338,827 (256,772)  56,247
Group 
2020Balance at 
1 January Charge for 
the year Payment Balance at 
31 December 
Year of assessment
Up to 2019 (7,719)  (7,719)
2020 194,507 (220,875)  (26,368)
National fiscal stabilization levy  16,807 30,095 (38,552)  8,350
Tax adjustment related to prior year (2018 tax 
audit report)  (71)  12,115  (12,115) (71)
 9,017 236,717 (271,542)  (25,808)
Bank
2021Balance at 
1 January Charge for 
the year Payment Balance at 
31 December 
Year of assessment
Up to 2020 (34,534) - -        (34,534)
2021 - 261,416 (191,164) 70,252
Tax adjustment related to prior year (2018 tax 
audit report)  (71) - -              (71)
National fiscal stabilization levy  8,350 40,490 (34,443)         14,397
Financial Sector Recovery Levy - 30,368 (25,832) 4,536
(26,255) 332,274 (251,439) 54,580Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 131
Bank 
2020Balance at 
1 January Charge for 
the year Payment Balance at 
31 December 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Year of assessment
Up to 2019 (7,043) - -         (7,043)
2020 - 191,501 (218,992)       (27,491)
Tax adjustment related to prior year (2018 tax 
audit report)  (71)  12,115 (12,115)              (71)
National fiscal stabilization levy  16,807 30,095 (38,552)         8,350
Total  9,693 233,711 (269,659)       (26,255)
The tax position up to the 2020 year of assessment has been agreed with the tax authorities. Liabilities arising 
have been settled as of 31 December 2021.The tax position for the remaining year of assessment is yet to be agreed with the tax authorities. 
20.  Deferred taxation (assets) / liabilities
Bank 
2021 Balance at 1/1Movement 
duringBalance at 
31/12Deferred 
tax assetsDeferred 
tax 
liabilities
Recognised in profit and loss
Property and equipment  20,361  (12,881)  7,480  -  7,480 
Loans and advances  (120,150)  (53,760)  (173,910)  (173,910)  - 
Employee benefit obligation  (17,521)  (10,845)  (28,366)  (28,366)  - 
Provisions  (558)  (1,649)  (2,207)  (2,207)  - 
 (117,868)  (79,135)  (197,003)  (204,483)  7,480 
Recognised in OCI
Employment benefit 
obligations (10,813)  (1,135)  (11,948)  (11,948)  - 
Available for sale investments  647  (211)  436  -  436 
Adjustment AFS equity investments  (108)  -  (108)  (108)  - 
Fair Value-Unlisted Investment  27  9  36  -  36 
 (10,247)  (1,337)  (11,584)  (12,056)  472 
Recognised in Retained Earnings
Impairment for 2017 (IFRS 9)  (29,340)  -  (29,340)  (29,340)  - 
Total  (157,455)  (80,472)  (237,927)  (245,879)  7,952 GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021132
Group
2021 Balance at 1/1Movement 
duringBalance at 
31/12Deferred 
tax assetsDeferred 
tax 
liabilities
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Recognised in profit and loss
Property and equipment  20,361  (12,879)  7,482  -  7,482 
Loans and advances  (120,150)  (53,760)  (173,910)  (173,910)  - 
Employee benefit obligation  (17,521)  (10,845)  (28,366)  (28,366)  - 
Provisions  (558)  (1,649)  (2,207)  (2,207)  - 
Tax losses carried forward  44  -  44  -  44 
 (117,824)  (79,133)  (196,957)  (204,483)  7,526 
Recognised in OCIEmployment benefit 
obligations (10,813)  (1,135)  (11,948)  (11,948)  - 
Available for sale equity 
investments  262  51  313  -  313 
Adjustment AFS equity investments (107)  -  (107)  (107)  - 
Fair Value-Unlisted investment in subsidiary - 2018  (5,368)  -  (5,368)  (5,368)  - 
Fair Value-Unlisted investment in subsidiary - 2017  12,232  -  12,232  -  12,232 
Fair Value-Unlisted Investment  (7,507)  511  (6,996)  (6,996)  - 
 (11,301)  (573)  (11,874)  (24,419)  12,545 
Recognised in Retained Earnings
Impairment for 2017 (IFRS 9)  (29,340)  -  (29,340)  (29,340)  - 
 (158,465)  (79,706)  (238,171)  (258,242)  20,071 
Bank 
2020 Balance at 1/1Movement 
duringBalance at 
31/12Deferred tax 
assetsDeferred tax 
liabilities
Recognised in profit and loss
Property and equipment  18,927  1,434  20,361  -  20,361 
Loans and advances  (62,278)  (57,872)  (120,150)  (120,150)  - 
Employee benefit obligation  (15,309)  (2,212)  (17,521)  (17,521)  - 
Provisions  -  (558)  (558)  (558)  - 
 (58,660)  (59,208)  (117,868)  (138,229)  20,361 Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 133
Bank 
2020 Balance at 1/1Movement 
duringBalance at 
31/12Deferred tax 
assetsDeferred tax 
liabilities
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Recognised in OCI
Employment benefit 
obligations (14,361)  3,548  (10,813)  (10,813)  - 
Available for sale investments  647  -  647  -  647 
Adjustment AFS equity investments  (108)  -  (108)  (108)  - 
Fair Value-Unlisted Investment  12  15  27  27 
 (13,810)  3,563  (10,247)  (10,921)  674 
Recognised in Retained Earnings
Impairment for 2017 (IFRS 9)  (29,340)  -  (29,340)  (29,340)  - 
 -  -  -  -  - 
Total  (101,810)  (55,645)  (157,455)  (178,490)  21,035 
Group 
2020 Balance at 1/1Movement 
duringBalance at 
31/12Deferred 
tax assetsDeferred tax 
liabilities
Recognised in profit and loss  18,927  1,434  20,361  -  20,361 
Property and equipment  (62,278)  (57,872)  (120,150)  (120,150)  - 
Loans and advances  (15,309)  (2,212)  (17,521)  (17,521)  - 
Employee benefit obligation  -  (558)  (558)  (558)  - 
Provisions  -  44  44  44 
Tax losses carried forward  (58,660)  (59,164)  (117,824)  (138,229)  20,405 
Recognised in OCI
Employment benefit 
obligations (14,361)  3,548  (10,813)  (10,813)  - 
Available for sale equity investments 268  (6)  262  -  262 
Adjustment AFS equity investments  (107)  -  (107)  (107)  - 
Fair Value-Unlisted investment 
in subsidiary - 2018 (5,368)  -  (5,368)  (5,368)  - 
Fair Value-Unlisted investment in subsidiary - 2017  12,232  -  12,232  -  12,232 
Fair Value-Unlisted Investment  12  (7,519)  (7,507)  -  (7,507)
 (7,324)  (3,977)  (11,301)  (16,288)  4,987 
Recognised in Retained 
Earnings
Impairment for 2017 (IFRS 9)  (29,340)  -  (29,340)  (29,340)  - 
 (95,324)  (63,141)  (158,465)  (183,857)  25,392 GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021134
21.  Earnings per share
Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the net profit attributable to equity holders of the Bank by the 
weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
2021 2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Profit attributable to equity holders  556,666  572,281  439,501  445,389 
Weighted average number of ordinary shares (basic 
and diluted)  265,000  265,000  265,000  265,000 
Basic earnings per share (expressed in Ghana 
pesewas per share)  210  216  166  168 
Diluted earnings per share (expressed in Ghana 
pesewas per share)  210  216  166  168 
22.  Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents consist of:
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Cash on hand  415,788  415,788  295,744  295,744 
Balance with Bank of Ghana  1,653,519  1,653,519  820,182  820,182 
Items in course of collection  187,571  187,571  307,953  307,953 
Accounts with other Banks  44,214  44,214  143,362  143,362 
Money market  -  -  -  - 
 2,301,092  2,301,092  1,567,241  1,567,241 
Current  2,301,092  2,301,092  1,567,241  1,567,241 
Non-current  -  -  -  - 
An amount of GHS 1,107,093,994 was maintained with Bank of Ghana (2020: GHS 945,793,267) representing 
the mandatory cash reserve as per the weekly Banking Supervision Department (BSD1) returns for the week ending 12 January 2022 (2020: 13 January 2021). This reserve represents and complies with the mandatory 
minimum of 10% (2020: 8%) of the Bank’s total deposits and is not available for use in the Bank’s day-to-day 
operations. Cash on hand, items in course of collection and balances with Bank of Ghana are non-interest-bearing.
23.  Non-pledged trading assets
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
At 1 January  221,339  221,339  142,790  142,790 
Additions  21,440,891  21,440,891  6,839,518  6,839,518 
Disposals  (21,355,932)  (21,355,932)  (6,866,241)  (6,866,241)
Gains from changes in fair value  171,360  171,360  105,272  105,272 
At 31 December  477,658  477,658  221,339  221,339 
Non-current  -  -  -  - Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 135
24.  Investments (other than securities)
2021 2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Listed equity instruments (note 24a) 3,195 4,902 1,895 2,994
Unlisted equity instruments (note 24bi) 584 21,464 438 15,540
3,779 26,366 2,333 18,534
24a.  Listed equity instruments
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
At 1 January  1,895  2,994  1,895  3,049 
Changes in fair values  1,300  1,908  -  (55)
At 31 December  3,195  4,902  1,895  2,994 
This represents investments in the ordinary shares of a number of listed companies.
24bi.  Unlisted equity instruments
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
At 1 January  438  15,540  332  12,390 
Additions  -  7,321  -  7,207 
Changes in fair values  146  (1,397)  106  (4,057)
At 31 December  584  21,464  438  15,540 
24bii. Fair values of unlisted equity instruments
2021 2020
Ordinary 
shares Bank GroupOrdinary 
shares Bank Group
Fidelity Bank 0.05%  584  584 0.05%  438  438 
Ghana Community Network 5%  -  - 5%  -  - 
Vivo Energy Limited 9%  -  3,899 9%  -  3,463 
Oasis Africa Fund 4.95%  -  13,022 4.95%  -  6,645 
Real Estates Investment Trust 
Plc9.13%  -  3,959 9.13%  -  4,994 
At 31 December -  584  21,464 -  438  15,540 
25 i. Loans and advances to customers
2021 2020
 Bank Group Bank Group
Term loans  4,696,829  4,696,829  3,630,405  3,630,405 
Overdrafts 211,667 211,667 389,910 389,910 
Staff loans 295,219 295,219 248,151 248,151 
Gross loans and advances  5,203,715 5,203,715  4,268,466  4,268,466 
Less        
Interest in suspense (87,256)  (87,256) (57,913)  (57,913)
Allowance for impairment (810,079)  (810,079) (597,965)  (597,965)
Net loans and advances  4,306,380 4,306,380  3,612,588 3,612,588 GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021136
2021 2020
 Bank Group Bank Group
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Current 3,456,245 3,465,245 1,202,816 1,202,816
Non-current 850,135 850,135 2,409,772 2,409,772
Allowance for impairment        
Balance at 1 January 597,965 598,594 373,377  374,006 
Charge for the year 324,800  324,800 224,588  224,588 
Write offs (112,686) (112,686) - -
Balance at 31 December 810,079  810,708 597,965  598,594 
The fifty largest exposures represent 45% of the loans and advances at the end of the year (2020: 69%). For 
detailed analysis of list per stage, refer to Credit Risk disclosures (Note 6).
25 ii. Advances to banks
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Placement with other banks 203,956 203,956 203,830 203,830
Impairment (2,926) (2,926) (2,926) (2,926)
Balance at 31 December 201,030 201,030 200,904 200,904
Current  201,030  201,030 200,904 200,904
All placement with other banks are short-term and mature less than 3 months after year-end.
Allowance for impairment
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Balance at 1 January 2,926 2,926 7,867 7,867
Charge for the year  -    -   (4,941) (4,941)
Balance at 31 December 2,926 2,926 2,926 2,926
For detailed analysis of list per stage, refer to Credit Risk disclosures (Note 6).
26.  Investment securities
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Short - term investments
Stocks and bonds 3,981,539 4,038,078 3,657,642 3,702,713
Treasury bills 600,969 602,849 970,108 971,982
4,582,508 4,640,927 4,627,750 4,674,695
Medium - term investments
GOG bonds 58,993 58,993 177,238 177,238
Long - term investmentsGOG note 5 years fixed rate 5,065,920 5,065,920 3,770,913 3,770,913
Balance at 31 December 9,707,421 9,765,840 8,575,901 8,622,846Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 137
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
At 1 January 8,575,901 8,622,846 5,996,593 6,025,382
Additions  13,837,968  13,845,854 24,842,884 24,881,397
Disposals (12,706,448) (12,702,860) (22,263,576) (22,283,933)
9,707,421 9,765,840 8,575,901 8,622,846
Current  937,818  939,697 1,346,746 1,348,746
Non-current  8,769,603  8,826,143 7,229,155 7,274,100
27.  Investments in subsidiary
GCB Capital Limited an entity incorporated in Ghana that engages in investment banking activities is the only 
subsidiary of the Bank.
The Bank’s holding in this entity is as set out below:
Bank
Name of company 2021
% holding2020
% holding2021 
Carrying 
amount2020 
Carrying 
amount
GCB Capital Limited 100 100 1,000 1,000
28.  Investment in associates 
2021 2020
 Bank Group Bank Group
At 1 January 28,274 91,681 28,274 100,391
Additions  -    15,709  -    -   
Share of profit, net of tax  -    (6,972)  -   (7,566)
Share of OCI  -    (4,314)  -   401
Dividends received from associates  -    (3,508)  -   (406)
Impairment of associates  -    (1,571)  -   
Exchange differences on translating foreign 
operation -    (8,836)  -   (1,211)
Interest received from associate  -    (4)  -   26
Interest paid to associate  -    95  -   46
Total at 31 December 28,274 82,280 28,274 91,681
The Bank has one direct associate Ghana International Bank (GHIB) and it considers Ghana International Bank 
(GHIB) as material to the Group. The Bank in addition holds indirect interest of 25% and 34% in Accra Markets Limited and NCR Ghana Limited respectively through its subsidiary.
Associates information
Country of 
incorporation Method % Ownership interest
2021 2020
Ghana International Bank United Kingdom Equity 20% 20%
Accra Markets Limited Ghana Equity 25% 25%
NCR Ghana Limited Ghana Equity 34% 34%GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021138
The country of incorporation is the same as the principal place of business for all associates. The percentage 
voting rights is equal to the percentage ownership for all associates.
Ghana International Bank is a strategic investment that facilitates the Group’s international trade.
Summarised financial information of material associates
Summarised Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income                       
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2021 2020
Revenue  101,856  103,657 
Profit/(Loss) from continuing operations  (72,311)  (37,409)
Other comprehensive income/(loss)  (21,570)  2,003 
Total comprehensive income  (93,881)  (35,406)
Attributable to investee’s shareholders  (93,881)  (35,406)
Summarised Statement of Financial Position         
2021 2020
Assets
Current  5,798,360  5,348,434 
Non-current  432,176  529,541 
Total assets  6,230,536  5,877,975 
Liabilities
Current  5,170,506  4,826,254 
Non-current  84,235  56,477 
Total liabilities  5,254,741  4,882,731 
Net assets  975,795  995,244 
Attributable to investee's shareholders  975,795  995,244 
Group's interest in net assets  195,159  199,049 
Carrying amount  82,280  91,681 
29.  Property, equipment and right-of-use assets
 
BankLeasehold 
land & 
buildingsFurniture &  
equipmentMotor 
Vehicles ComputersRight 
of use  
assetsCapital 
work in  
progress Total
Cost
Balance as at 
1 January 2021177,280 231,029 20,334 184,026 34,509 23,589 670,767
Addition 842 13,769 7,436 7,306 4,195 55,187 88,735
Disposals - (140) (3,478) (16)   - (3,634)
Transfers 14,411 3,909 737 16,792  (35,849) -
Balance at 31 December 2021 192,533 248,567 25,029 208,108 38,704 42,927 755,868Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 139
 
BankLeasehold 
land & 
buildingsFurniture &  
equipmentMotor 
Vehicles ComputersRight 
of use  
assetsCapital 
work in  
progress Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Accumulated 
depreciation             
1 Jan 2021 27,222 192,405 14,699 138,480 17,948 -390,754
Charge for the year 5,754 21,354 3,278 26,094 11,486 - 67,966
Disposal - (135) (3,159) (16) -   - (3,310)
Balance at 31 December 2021 32,976 213,624 14,818 164,558 29,434 -455,410
Net book value              
Balance as at 31 December 2021 159,557 34,942 10,211 43,550 9,270 42,927 300,458
BankLeasehold 
land 
& buildingsFurniture &  
equipmentMotor 
Vehicles ComputersRight of 
use 
assetsCapital 
work in  
progress Total
Cost
Balance as at 
1 January 2020 155,021 221,020 18,529 154,011 20,709 22,997 592,287
Addition 830 8,334 3,932 11,401 13,800 43,792 82,089
Disposals - (446) (2750) -   - (3,196)
Write off - (230) - (11)   (172) (413)
Transfers 21,429 2351 623 18,625   (43,028) -
Balance at 
31 December 2020 177,280 231,029 20,334 184,026 34,509 23,589 670,767
Accumulated depreciation             
1 Jan 2020 22,124 164,648 14,008 115,526 5,435 - 321,741
Charge for the year 5,098 28,009 2,783 22,964 12,513 - 71,367
Disposal - (213) (2,092) -  - (2,305)
Write Off - (39) -  (10) - (49)
Balance at 
31 December 2020 27,222 192,405 14,699 138,480 17,948 - 390,754
Net book value             
Balance as at 
31 December 2020 150,058 38,624 5,635 45,546 16,561 23,589 280,013GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021140
 
GroupLeasehold 
land & 
buildingsFurniture &  
equipmentMotor 
Vehicles ComputersRight 
of use  
assetsCapital 
work in  
progress Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Cost
Balance as at 
1 January 2021177,495 231,21820,829 184,161 34,509 23,589 671,801
Addition 1,090 13,919 7,436 7,402 4,195 55,187 89,229
Disposals  -   (140) (3,478) (16)  -    -   (3,634)
Transfers 14,411 3,909 737 16,792  -   (35,849  -   
Balance at 
31 December 2021 192,996 248,906 25,524 208,339 38,704 42,927 757,396
Accumulated 
depreciation
1 Jan 2020 27,227 192,525 14,890 138,558 17,947  -   391,147
Charge for the year 5,763 21,418 3,402 26,158 11,486  -   68,227
Disposal  -   (135) (3,159) (16)  -    -   (3,310)
Balance at 31 December 2021 32,990 213,808 15,133 164,700 29,433  -   456,064
Net book value
Balance as at 
31 December 2021 160,006 35,098 10,391 43,639 9,271 42,927 301,332
GroupLeasehold 
land 
& 
buildingsFurniture &  
equipmentMotor 
Vehicles ComputersRight of 
use 
assetsCapital 
work in  
progress Total
Cost
Balance as at 1 January 2020155,133 221,209 19,024 154,117 20,709 22,997 593,189
Addition 933 8,334 3,932 11,430 13,800 43,792 82,221
Disposals  -   (446) (2,750)  -    -    -   (3,196)
Write off  -   (230)  -   (11)  -   (172) (413)
Transfers 21,429 2,351 623 18,625  -   (43,028) -
Balance at 31 December 2020177,495 231,218 20,829 184,161 34,509 23,589 671,801Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 141
GroupLeasehold 
land 
& 
buildingsFurniture &  
equipmentMotor 
Vehicles ComputersRight of 
use 
assetsCapital 
work in  
progress Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Accumulated 
depreciation
1 Jan 2020 22,126 164,736 14,075 115,576 5,434  -   321,947
Charge for the year 5,101 28,042 2,907 22,992 12,513  -   71,555
Disposal  -   (214) (2,092)  -    -    -   (2,306)
Write Off  -   (39) (10)  -    -   (49)
Balance at 31 December 202027,227 192,525 14,890 138,558 17,947  -   391,147
Net book value
Balance as at 
31 December 2020150,268 38,693 5,939 45,603 16,562 23,589 280,654
There was no indication of impairment of property and equipment held by the Group at 31 December 2021 
(2020:Nil). None of the property and equipment of the Group had been pledged as security for liabilities and there were no restrictions on the title of any of the Group’s property and equipment at the reporting date and 
at the end of the previous year. 
30.  Intangible assets                                                                                              
BankCWIP SoftwareCustomer 
relationship Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Cost
Balance at 1 January 2021  43,837  267,834  95,306  406,977 
Additions  57,281  -  -  57,281 
Transfers  (75,512)  75,512  -  - 
Balance at 31 December 2021  25,606  343,346  95,306  464,258 
Accumulated amortisation
Balance at 1 January 2021  -  158,873  57,183  216,056 
Charge for the year  -  61,142  19,061  80,203 
Balance at 31 December 2021  -  220,015  76,244  296,259 
Carrying amountsBalance at 31 December 2021  25,606  123,331  19,062  167,999 GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021142
BankCWIP SoftwareCustomer 
relationship Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Cost
Balance at 1 January 2020  48,607  202,863  95,306  346,776 
Additions  82,747  64,971  -  147,718 
Transfers  (87,517)  -  (87,517)
Balance at 31 December 2020  43,837  267,834  95,306  406,977 
Accumulated amortisation
Balance at 1 January 2020  -  106,834  38,122  144,956 
Charge for the year  -  52,039  19,061  71,100 
Balance at 31 December 2020  -  158,873  57,183  216,056 
Carrying amountsBalance at 31 December 2020  43,837  108,961  38,123  190,921 
GroupCWIP SoftwareCustomer 
relationship Total
Cost
Balance at 1 January 2021  43,955  267,936  95,306  407,197 
Additions  57,326  -  -  57,326 
Transfers  (75,513)  75,513  -  - 
Balance at 31 December 2021  25,768  343,449  95,306  464,523 
Accumulated amortisationBalance at 1 January 2021  -  158,878  57,183  216,061 
Charge for the year  -  61,176  19,061  80,237 
Balance at 31 December 2021  -  220,054  76,244  296,298 
Carrying amountsBalance at 31 December 2021  25,768  123,395  19,062  168,225 
GroupCWIP SoftwareCustomer 
relationship Total
Cost
Balance at 1 January 2020  48,607  202,863  95,306  346,776 
Additions  82,865  65,073  -  147,938 
Transfers  (87,517)  -  (87,517)
Balance at 31 December 2020  43,955  267,936  95,306  407,197 
Accumulated amortisationBalance at 1 January 2020  -  106,834  38,122  144,956 
Charge for the year  -  52,044  19,061  71,105 
Balance at 31 December 2020  -  158,878  57,183  216,061 
Carrying amountsBalance at 31 December 2020  43,955  109,058  38,123  191,136 
Intangible assets represent licenses for computer software and customer relationship. There was no indication 
of impairment of    intangible assets held by the Group at the reporting date and at the end of the previous year.Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 143
31.  Other Assets
2021 2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Account receivables 418,404 427,677 346,234 348,486
Prepayments 108,859 108,875 114,198 114,215
527,263 536,552 460,432 462,701
32 i Deposits from banks & other financial institutions
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Current account 596,261 596,261 484,964 484,964
Time deposits 151,328 151,328 130,454 130,454
747,589 747,589 615,418 615,418
Current 747,589 747,589 615,418 615,418
32 ii Deposits from customers 
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Current account  5,725,298  5,714,159  4,830,456  4,823,178 
Savings deposits 5,018,638 5,018,638  4,673,945  4,673,945 
Time deposits 2,421,730 2,421,730  1,848,117  1,848,117 
  13,165,666 13,154,527  11,352,518  11,345,240 
Current 13,165,666 13,154,527 11,298,063 11,290,785
Non-current - - 54,455 54,455
The twenty largest depositors made up 17.30% of total deposits at the end of the year (2020:14.37%).
33.  Other liabilities
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Creditors 322,992 322,992  204,760 204,760
Accruals  86,643  89,939  57,757 58,313 
Other liabilities 234,242 233,625  159,064 158,321 
  643,877  646,556  421,581 421,394 
Current  643,877  646,556  421,581 421,394
Included in other liabilities is an amount of GHS 8.8 million being provision for legal actions brought against the 
Bank by customers   and its employees.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021144
34.  Borrowings
The Group and Bank 2021 2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
At 1 January 772,525 457,578
Additions 25,402,045 3,872,019
Repayments (25,186,497) (3,557,072)
988,073 772,525
Comprising:Bank of Ghana 599,384 399,384
First National Bank (FNB) 13,860 35,000
First Atlantic Bank  -   26,518
Cal Bank  -   100,000
Fidelity Bank 30,000 30,000
Agricultural Development Bank  -   20,000
Ghana Amalgamated Trust Plc 42,500 40,000
Teachers Fund 25,000 34,019
Standard Chartered Bank  -   15,000
Zenith Bank Ghana Ltd  -   32,627
United Bank for Africa 46,201 39,977
Energy Commission 20,000  -   
Sahel Sahara Bank 35,000  -   
Societe Generale Bank 50,000  -   
Ghana International Bank 126,128  -   
988,073 772,525
35.  Employment benefit obligations
The Group and Bank 2021 2020
Post-employment defined benefit plan (a) 110,779 110,599
Other long-term employee benefit (b) 2,685 2,723
113,464 113,322
Post-employment defined and other Long-term benefit plan 
Apart from the legally required social security scheme, the Bank contributes to the following postemployment 
defined benefit plans and other longterm employee benefit plan. These plans expose the Bank to actuarial risks, such as longevity risk, interest rate risk and market risk.
Other Long-term employee benefit plan
Plan A   long service awards accrue to employees based on graduated periods of uninterrupted service. These 
awards accrue over the service life of employees. Employees in service with the Bank after fifteen (15) years become eligible to receive cash payments at graduated rates when employees achieve stipulated milestones set 
by the Bank. The terms of settlement of long service award is based on the achievement of every milestone. Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 145
Post-employment defined benefit plan
• Plan B   The Bank pays monthly pension benefits to retired employees, under a closed defined benefit 
pension scheme. Under this scheme, beneficiaries are paid pensions equal to 60% of the net basic 
salaries of their serving counterparts.
• Plan C   The Bank also pays postretirement medical care for its retired staff and their dependents below 
18 years of age.
Movements for the year
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2021 2020
At 1 January 110,599 116,230
Net expense recognised in profit or loss 21,401 23,547
Other comprehensive income (4,540) (14,192)
Other (16,681) (14,986)
110,779 110,599
Net expense recognised in profit or loss
Current service cost 686 579
Interest expense / (income) 20,715 22,968
21,401 23,547
Included in other comprehensive incomeRe-measurement of loss/(gain)
Actuarial loss/(gain) arising from:
Financial assumptions (11,067) 7,252
Experience 6,527 (21,444)
(4,540) (14,192)
Other
Benefits paid (16,681) (14,986)
Net movement 180 (5,631)
Balance at 31 December represented by:
Net defined benefit liability (Plan B) 65,820 74,313
Net defined benefit liability (Plan C) 44,959 36,286
110,779 110,599
Other long-term employee benefits
2021 2020
Movement for the yearAt 1 January 2,723 2,434
Net expense recognised in profit or loss 596 693
Actuarial gains/loss recognised in profit or loss 988 (271)
Other (1,622) (133)
At 31 December 2,685 2,723
Net expense recognised in profit or lossCurrent service cost 178 162
Interest expense/(income) 418 531
596 693GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021146
2021 2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Included in profit or loss
Re-measurement of loss/(gain)
Actuarial loss/(gain) arising from:Actuarial loss/(gain) arising from:
Financial assumptions (27) 77
Experience 1,015 (348)
988 (271)
OtherBenefits paid (1,622) (133)
The following are the principal actuarial assumptions at the reporting date: 
Discount rates used      20.51% 21.00%
Future salary growth       12.50% 15.00%
Rate of inflation   11.00% 9.50%
Medical inflation  12.00% 11.50%
Future pension growth  12.50% 15.00%
Sensitivity analysis (Combined schemes)
Reasonably possible changes at the reporting date to any of the relevant actuarial assumptions, holding other 
assumptions constant, would have affected the defined benefit obligation by the following amounts shown 
below:
2021 2020
Increase Decrease Increase Decrease
Discount rate (2% movement) (11,520) 14,578 (11,237) 14,169
Future pension growth (2% movement) 6,030 (5,307) 7,311 (6,383)
Medical inflation (2% movement) 10,413 (7,609) 7,311 (5,468)
Although the analysis does not take account of the full distribution of cash flows expected under the plans, it 
does provide an approximation of the sensitivity of the assumptions shown.Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 147
36.  Capital and reserves
i. Stated Capital
2021 2020
Authorised:Number 
(000)Value Number 
(000)Value
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Ordinary shares of no par value 1,500,000 - 1,500,000 -
Issued:Issued for cash 115,000 60,030 115,000 60,030
Transfer from Retained Earnings 86,500 438,343 86,500 438,343
Capitalisation of reserves 1,000 2 1,000 2
Transfer from other surplus 62,500 1,625 62,500 1,625
265,000 500,000 265,000 500,000
There is no unpaid liability and no call or instalment unpaid on any share. There is no share in treasury.
ii. Statutory reserve fund
Statutory reserve represents cumulative amounts set aside from annual profits after tax required under the 
Banking Act. The proportion of net profits transferred to reserves ranges from 12.5% to 50% of net profit after tax, depending on the relationship that the balance on statutory reserves bears to paid-up capital.
iii. Regulatory Credit risk reserve
Credit risk reserve represents the cumulative balance of amounts transferred from/to retained earnings to meet gaps in impairment allowances based on Bank of Ghana’s provisioning guidelines and IFRS.
2021 2020
Credit risk reserves - Loans and advances Bank Group Bank Group
IFRS impairment 813,005 813,005 517,838 517,838
Bank of Ghana provision 764,736 764,736 346,462 346,462
Excess of BOG provision over IFRS impairment - - - -
Total credit risk reserve - - - -
iv. Fair value reserves
The fair value reserve comprises the cumulative net change in the fair value of equity instruments until the assets are derecognised or impaired.
v. Other reserves
Other reserves represent actuarial gains and losses on pension obligations and foreign currency differences arising from the translation of the financial statements of foreign operations.
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
At 1 January (32,429) (755) (43,073) (10,188)
Actuarial (loss)/ gain 4,540 4,540 14,192  14,192 
Deferred tax on actuarial loss 1,135 1,135 (3,548) (3,548)
Foreign currency translation differences on 
foreign operations - (8,836) - (1,211)
At 31 December (26,754) (3,916) (32,429) (755)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021148
37.  Contingent liabilities and commitments
Off balance sheet items
The Group engages in business activities involving acceptances, performance bonds and indemnities. The 
majority of these facilities are offset by corresponding obligations of third parties, the nominal amounts of which are not reflected in the statements of financial position.
Nature of instruments
An acceptance is an undertaking by a Bank to pay a bill of exchange drawn on a customer. The Bank expects most acceptances to be presented, but reimbursement by the customer is normally immediate.
Other contingent liabilities include transaction related customs and performance bonds and are generally short 
term commitments to third parties.
Commitments to lend to a customer in the future are made subject to certain conditions. Such commitments 
are either made for a fixed period or agreed maturity dates but are cancellable by the lender subject to notice 
requirements. Documentary credits commit the Bank to make payments to third parties on the production of documents, which are usually reimbursed immediately by customers. Customers are required to deposit cash in a margin account in respect of documentary and commercial letters of credit.
The following summarize the nominal principal amounts of contingent liabilities and commitments with off-
balance sheet risks.
2021 2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Guarantees and indemnities  916,478  916,478 383,336 383,336
Documentary and commercial letters of credit  527,205  527,205 314,999 314,999
 1,443,683  1,443,683 698,335 698,335
Commitments
Loan commitments  645,425  645,425 429,723 429,723
 2,089,108  2,089,108 1,128,058 1,128,058
Legal proceedings
As at the end of the reporting period, legal proceedings instituted against the Group/Bank are described below. 
No provision has been made in this financial statement s the Group’s Management does not consider that there is any probable loss.
Plaintiff vrs GCB Bank Plc & Others
This matter relates to one of the Banks purchased in 2014 under the Purchase and Assumption (P&A) Agreement entered into between GCB and the Joint receivers. The plaintiff filed a motion directed at GCB Bank Plc to pay a sum of USD 7.43 million which was due on 21 February 2017 and being held in the name of the Registrar, High Court, Commercial Division to be paid them. The amount had been lodged into an escrow account by the management of the Bank assumed under the P&A agreement.
The High Court on 7 February 2020 ruled that GCB Bank Plc pay the sum to the plaintiff to which the Bank has 
successfully filed a stay of execution. 
Management is appealing the decision of the High Court in the Court of Appeal and is of the view that the Bank 
will be successful as there is evidence on the records that the claim should be directed to the Joint Receivers for 
settlement and not GCB Bank Plc. Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 149
Plaintiff vrs GCB Bank Plc 
This matter relates to an ongoing suit against the Bank in Nigeria. The plaintiffs are claiming an amount of USD 
1.64 million against one of the Bank’s purchased in 2014 under the Purchase and Assumption (P&A) Agreement entered into between GCB and the Joint receivers for the wrongful arrest of a shipping vessel.
The plaintiffs seeks to replace the previous Bank that was assumed with GCB Bank Plc in the lawsuit rather than 
the Joint Receivers.
Management is appealing the decision of the Court of Appeal in the Supreme Court and is of the view that the 
Bank will be successful as there is evidence on record that the claim should be directed to the Joint Receivers for settlement and not GCB Bank Plc. 
Plaintiff vs GCB Bank Plc 
The plaintiff let out its property to one of the banks assumed under the Purchase and Assumption (P&A) Agreement entered into between GCB and the Joint receivers. The amount claimed is unpaid monthly rent of USD 11, 698 from 2016 till date plus service charges and associated interest. 
Management is of the view that the claim should be directed to the Joint Receivers for settlement and not GCB 
Bank Plc. 
Plaintiff vs GCB Bank Plc and Other
The Plaintiff is seeking reliefs of USD 64 million being the recovery of the total sum of unlawful destruction and or appropriation of plaintiff’s machines, chemicals and office equipment and interest on the said sum of amount at the prevailing commercial bank rate from Feb 2012 to the date of final Payment. 
This is because the Plaintiff has declared that the destruction of the machines was not the subject matter of the 
facility which was finally auctioned in satisfaction of the Judgment debt. 
Management is confident that it will win this case as Plaintiff will have to prove claims with documentary 
evidence.
Plaintiff vs Other and GCB Bank Plc
Plaintiff’s claim is for general damages of GHS 70 m for its breach of duty of care and general damages of GHS 30m for defamation for dishonoured cheques and cost including legal fees.
Management has filed a motion to strike out the suit against it because it believes the Bank is not the proper 
party to the suit.
Plaintiff vs Other and GCB Bank Plc
The plaintiff sued the defendants at the Kumasi High Court for the recovery of GHS 2.8 million. The amount was 
the plaintiff’s investment in one of the Banks assumed under the Purchase and Assumption (P&A) Agreement entered into between GCB and the Joint receivers. 
Management has filed a motion to strike out the suit against it because it believes the Bank is not the proper 
party to the suit.
Interests in associates
There are no contingent liabilities incurred by the Group arising from its interest in associates.
38.  Related parties
a. Transactions with executive directors and key management personnel
Key management personnel are defined as those persons having authority and responsibility for planning, directing and controlling the activities of the Group (directly or indirectly) and comprise the Directors and Senior Management of GCB Bank Plc.
There were no material transactions with companies in which a Director or other members of key management 
personnel (or any connected person) is related except for Dannex Aryton Starwin Plc of which Mr. Nik Amartfio 
a Non-Executive Director of the Bank holds shares. As at the reporting date Dannex Aryton Starwin Plc has a loan of GHS 21.5m in the books of the Bank.GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021150
Remuneration of Executive Directors and other key management personnel
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2021 2020
Salaries and other short-term benefits 20,150 16,506
Post-employment benefits 2,507 1,896
22,657 18,402
Remuneration of the Executive Directors during the year amounted to GHS 7.62m. (2020: GHS 3.35m).
Details of transactions and balances between the Bank and Executive Directors and other key management 
personnel are as follows:
Loans 2021 2020
Loans outstanding at 1 January 2,463 1,958
Net movement 1,667 505
Loans outstanding at 31 December 4,130 2,463
Interest income 172 138
Deposits
Deposits at 1 January 1,048 604
Net movement during the year  167 444
Deposits at 31 December 1,215 1,048
Interest expense 130 98
Loans to executive directors and key management personnel which include housing, car and other personal 
loans are given under terms that are no more favourable than those given to other staff. No impairment has been recognised in respect of loans granted to executive directors and key management personnel at 
31 December 2021. The housing and car loans are secured by the underlying assets. All other loans are unsecured. 
No individual director has a loan amount more than 1% of the stated capital. The total loan amount of the directors is also less than 1% of the stated capital. No individual staff member has a loan amount more than 2% of the stated capital. 
b. Transactions with non-executive directors
No loans were advanced to non-executive directors during the year. There were no balances outstanding on account of loans due from non-executive directors at the year end.
Fees and allowances paid to non-executive directors during the year amounted to GHS 2.54m (2020: GHS 
3.62m).
c. Transactions and balances with subsidiary
GCB Capital Limited 
Fixed deposit investments are placed with the Bank. The subsidiary’s current account is held with the Bank. 
Interest accrues on these placements at normal commercial rates. Balances due to/from the subsidiary at the year end were as follows:Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 151
Other Assets 2021 2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Deposits
Current account 11,139 7,278
d. Balances and transactions with associates
Balances due to/from associates at year-end were as follows:
2021 2020
Current account balances (Foreign) -GHIB 31,112 76,372
Credit Facilities (Foreign) – GHIB 116,775 -
Contingent letter of credit and acceptances (Foreign) - GHIB 8,663 -
The Group entered into the following transactions with its associates:
Dividend received - 406
Interest received on current account balances (foreign) 21 (132)
Interest paid on current account balances (foreign) (468) (228)
Government of Ghana
The Government of Ghana directly holds 21.36% shares in GCB Bank Plc and 29.89% indirectly through its 
shareholding in SSNIT. The total of its direct and indirect shareholding is 51.25%.
39.  Subsequent events
There was no significant event after the reporting period. However, the presence of COVID 19 requires management to continue to assess the impact of the pandemic on the Group’s operations. During the year, the Bank conducted an extensive assessment on the Impact and have provided information on their assessment as 
part of the director’s report. Refer to the Report of the Directors for the impact of COVID-19 on the Group.
40.  Value added statements for the year ended 31 December 2021
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Interest earned and other operating income 2,917,406 2,947,188 2,412,485 2,435,239
Direct cost of Services (1,006,890) (1,009,001) (896,132) (906,980)
Value added by banking services 1,910,516 1,938,187 1,516,353 1,528,259
Non-banking income 9,576 8,610 7,600 6,807
Impairments (324,800) (324,800) (219,647) (219,647)
Value added 1,595,292 1,621,997 1,304,306 1,315,419
Distributed as follows:
To Employees:Non-Executive Directors 2,539 2,664 3,619 3,698
Executives directors 9,450 9,952 7,616 8,358
Other employees 625,327 628,939 548,715 549,877
637,316 641,555 559,950 561,933GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021152
2021 2020
Bank Group Bank Group
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
To Government:Income tax 253,138 259,694 162,388 165,437
To providers of capitalDividend to shareholders 66,250 66,250 53,000 53,000
To expansion and growth:
Depreciation and amortisation 148,171 148,466 142,467 142,660
Retained earnings 490,417 506,032 386,501 392,389
638,588 654,498 528,968 535,049
Total Distribution 1,595,292 1,621,997 1,304,306 1,315,419
41.  Corporate social responsibility
Ghana’s largest indigenous Bank, GCB Bank Plc continues to make substantial investments in Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) despite the difficult operating environment occasioned by the Covid-19 pandemic. 
In 2021, GCB Bank Plc constituted a CSR Committee and revised its CSR policy aimed at giving more impetus to 
the Bank’s societal investment efforts and also in line with the Bank of Ghana’s directive for the Board to have 
oversight responsibility for Corporate Social Responsibility. 
In the year under review, GCB Bank Plc invested GHS 1.79 million as corporate social responsibility, largely in the 
areas of poverty alleviation, education and skills development, environmental sustainability and community development, sanitation and healthcare, sports, MSME growth and humanitarian relief. Key CSR investments 
include sponsorship of the Royal Dialogue on Climate Change and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
organized as a precursor to the 26
th United Nations Conference of the Parties on Climate Change (COP26), 
contribution towards the establishment of the first Women’s School of Soccer 
Excellence in West Africa, Ghana Black Stars’ s qualification for the AFCON 2021 and World Cup, donations to 
the Covid-19 Trust Fund, Dagbon Development Foundation, traditional festivals and tradition, among others. 
The Bank through sponsorship and donations reinvigorated interest in golf In Accra and Kumasi.  Notes to the Financial Statements  (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 153
42.  Analysis of shareholding as at the year-end 2021
No. of 
Shareholders Holders % No. of Shares% of 
Holding
1   1,000 84,996 92 18,388,787 6.94
1001   5,000 6,017 7 13,184,765 4.98
5001   10,000 539 1 3,978,783 1.50
Above 10,000 402 0 229,447,665 86.58
91,954 100 265,000,000 100
Directors’ Shareholdings
The Director named below held the following number of shares in the Bank as at 31 December 2021:
No. of shares % of Holding
Edward Prince Amoatia Younge 9,000 0.0034
  
42a.  Analysis of shareholding as at the year-end 2021
No. Names No. of shares % of Holding
1. Social Security And National Insurance Trust 79,199,550 29.9
2. Government Of Ghana C/O Ministry Of Finance 56,608,613 21.3
3. Ofori, Daniel 19,847,154 7.4
4. Scgn/J.p. Morgan Bank Luxembourg Sare Skagen Kon-Tik 13,815,000 5.2
5. Scgn/Pictet Africa Non Tax 6275J Pictetmast 7,604,968 2.9
6. Scgn/Ntgs Se Lux Cl A/C Re Ludp Re: Aif Cl 8% 3,291,135 1.2
7. Gcb Staff Provident Fund 2,996,695 1.1
8. Scgn/Citabank Kuwait Inv Authority 2,600,000 1.0
9. Scgn/Ssbtc For Change Glbl Frontier Mkts 2,448,485 0.9
10. Scgn / Enterprise Life Ass. Co. Policy Holders 2,144,312 0.8
11. Krohne Fund 1,000,000 0.8
12. Ghana Reinsurance Company Ltd General Business 1,799,651 0.7
13. Ghana Cocoa Board 1,600,000 0.6
14. Scgn/’Epack Investment Fund Limited Transaction E I F L 1,531,200 0.6
15. Enterprice Tier 2 Occupational Pension Scheme 1,519,207 0.6
16. Scgn/Ssb Eaton Vance Structured Emerging Market Fund 1,347,533 0.5
17. Scgn/Ssb Eaton Vance Taxmanaged Emerging Market Fund 1,285,170 0.5
18. Ges Occ Pension – Databank Financial Services 1,266,741 0.5
19. Std Noms/Eaton Vance Coll. Inv Trust For Emp Ben 1,226,340 0.5
20. Tema Oil Refinery (Tor) Limited 1,000,000 0.4
Top 20 shareholders 205,214,854 77.4
  Others 59,785,146 22.6
  Grand Total 265,000,000 100.00GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021154
CORRESPONDENT BANKS
LONDON
Ghana International Bank Plc 67 Cheapside, 1st Floor
Regina HouseLondon EC2V 6AZ England
BIC: GHIBGB2L
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Citibank N.A.16th Floor, Zone Street
New York, N.Y. 10043, USABIC: CITIUS33
EUROPE
Commerzbank AG Kaiserstrasse 16 60261
Frankfurt AM Main
Germany
BIC: COBADEFF
BHF Bank AG Frankfurt AM MainGermany
BIC: BHFBDEFF
MTOS/AGENTS
UNITED KINGDOM
UnityLink Financial Services Ltd. 158-160 Balham High Road
London SW12 9BNHead OfficeTel: 0044-20-87722160Fax: 0044- 20- 86753-284        0044-20-82397-125
Email: unitylinkmoney@aol.co.
SPAIN
Money Exchange, S.A P. Santa Maria de la Cabeza
12 28045 Madrid SpainTel: +34917617170www.moneyspain.net
Email: pnovoa@moneyexchange.net
Skype: money.exchange.eurAGENTS AND CORRESPONDENT BANKSGCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 155
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
MoneyGram International Money Transfer
MoneyGram Payment Systems 
Inc.
1550 Utica Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55416 USAEmail: www.moneygram.comTel: +17203625024
Familylink Money Transfer Inc. Transfers Inc. USA
1205 College Avenue
Bronx N.Y. 10456, USATel: 001 718 293 6280
Email : familylink@mns.com
Western Union Western Union Laroc.
Centro Empresarial
Forum 2, Santa Ana. San Jose
Costa RicaTel: +1-201-263-5049
RIA Money Transfer 6565 Knott Avenue
Buena Park
California 90620U.S.A.Tel: +1 5623452632
SFB Capital Systems LLC 1031 Sterling RoadSuite 201, Herndon
Virginia 20170
U.S.A.Tel: + 1 7035996975GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021156
NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS TELEPHONE
Accra Zone
Regional Manager's Office
P.O. Box NT 96, Accra New Town 
areaaccra@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0302-249772/0302-222641/
0302-225928 Fax:0302-236671
37 Military Hosp. Agency
P. O. Box BC 268, Burma CampMgr: 0302-784182Mgr:0509738320/0540319854
Abeka Lapaz                                   P.O. Box AN 5288, Accra North 
abekalapazmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0509738320/0540319854
Abelenkpe PMB, Achimota School Accra 
abelenkpemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0206889721/0261551941/0547296708  
Accra New Town
accranewtownmgr@gcb.com.ghP. O. Box NT 96, Accra New TownFax: 0302-236935
Mgr: 0302-236935/0302-222641/0203916587
Accra North P.O.Box AN 5206, Accra-North 
accranorthmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0302-253055/0302-223645Fax: 0302-250245
Amasaman amasamanmgr@gcb.com.gh
P. O. BoxAM 117, Amasaman0303-969958/0303-969959                                                                              
Boundary Road P.O. Box 819, Accra boundaryroadmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0302-682992/0302-682993 
Burma CampP.O Box B.C. 268, Burma Camp, 
Accra  burmacampmgr@gcb.com.gh                          Mgr:0302-784182
Fax:0302-770341
Dansoman PMB 17,Dansoman
dansomanmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0302-301410 Fax: 0302-301454
Dome P. O Box KW 247, Kwabenya-Atomic domemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0302-420039/0302-420041
Haatso P. O. Box WY 2115, Kwabenya
haatsomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0303-966759/0303-966760
High Street
highstreetmgr@gcb.com.gh
P. O. Box 2971, Accra  Mgr: 0302-662337/0302-672857
/0302-668743
Fax: 0302-673496
Kaneshie Industrial AreaP. O. Box AN 12513, Accra North 
kanindmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0302-220551/0302-220591
/0289700359List of BranchesGCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 157
NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS TELEPHONE
Kaneshie Market
kanmktmgr@gcb.com.gh
P. O. Box 171, KaneshieMgr: 0302-227568/0302-229005
/0577076454
Fax: 0302-227568
Kasoa Main P. O. Box KS 557, Kasoa
kasoamainmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0302-862430/0302-862429 
Kasoa Market P. O. Box KS 557, Kasoakasoamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0302-862831-3/0244570253/0208249987
KisseimanP. O. Box AT 1946, Achimota 
kisseimanmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0302-410444/0302-410724
Fax: 0302-410799
Korle-Bu P.O. Box 3852, Accra korlebumgr@gcb.com.ghFax:0302-666522Mgr: 0302-666524/0302-666521
Liberty House P.O. Box 4443, Accra 
libertymgr@gcb.com.ghFax: 0302-663556Mgr:0302-663556/0302-666631-7
Makola Market P.O. Box 4832, Accramakolamgr@gcb.com.gh  Mgr: 0509677577Fax : 0509677577
Ministries P.O. Box MB.8, Accraministriesmgr@gcb.com.gh Mgr: 0302-673950/ 0302-662170Fax: 0302-674150
Nima P.O. Box, NM 24, Nimanimamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0302-222441/0302-222439/0508535112
Osu P.O. Box 0212, Osu, Accra
osumgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:020-2011912/0302-782798/9Fax: 0302-782812
Republic House
P.O. Box 5550, Accra-North 
republicmgr@gcb.com.ghFax: 0302-681812
Mgr:0302-681810/0302-680355
/0302681862
Ring Road West P. O. Box ST 498, Kaneshie, Accra 
rrwmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0302-224703/0302-225605
/0500404543
Fax: 0302-225270
Tantra Hill tantrahillmgr@gcb.com.ghPMB, Achimota Market Post OfficeFax:0302-412822Mgr:020-2015795/0302-412817
Trade Fair SiteP.O. Box 198, Trade Fair Centre La 
tradefairmgr@gcb.com.gh Mgr: 0302-774270/0302-778274
Fax: 0302-778275
Weija                                                                                        P.O. Box  WJ 643, Weija Accra        
weijamgr@gcb.com.gh                     0303-969962/0244362091           GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021158
NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS TELEPHONE
TEMA ZONE                 
Area Manager's Office P.O. Box CO 152, Tema
areatema@gcb.com.gh0303-204824 
A & C Mall                                                    GA-412-1174 ancmallmgr@gcb.com.gh Mgr:0302-664910
Aburi
P.O. Box 98, Aburi
aburimgr@gcb.com.ghFax:0342822033
Mgr: 0502939961/0244792520
/03428-22043-45
Ada P. O. Box AF55, Adaadamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0303-910411/0303-910412/3
Adenta Shopping Centre adentashpcntmgr@gcb.com.gh
P. O. Box AF 2070, AdentaFax:0302-522542Mgr: 0302-522542
Adjiringano P. O. Box MD 1727, Madina 
adjiriganormgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0303-3969960-1/0207434271-2
Akosombo P.O. Box 24, Akosombo
akosombomgr@gcb.com.ghFax: 03430-20530Mgr: 03430-21142/03430-20472
Akropong Akwapim P.O. Box 83, Akropong Akwapimakropongmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0245130850
Akuse P. O. Box 40, Akuseakusemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03420-91311Fax:   0377900013
Ashaiman ashaimanmgr@gcb.com.ghP.O. Box AS 199, AshaimanMgr:0303306606
Cent.Univ.College
centralunimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0501327283/0502569063/
0558035035
East Legon P.O Box 134, Accra 0302507043
Evergreen Agency 0303-202094
Legon P.O. Box LG 17, Legonlegonmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr-
0289456996/02894569967/0502568703
Madina P.O. Box MD 431, Madina,Accra
madiamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr-0302-501240/0203255954
Madina Zongo Junc. GM-016-4823, Madina Zongomadinazjuncmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0555351374List of Branches (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 159
NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS TELEPHONE
Mampong-Akwapim makwapimmgr@gcb.com.gh
P.O. Box 54, Mampong-AkwapimMgr:03427-22049/03427-95872/0205467887
Mandela-Park GPS Code – GB—005-9457, 
Ashaiman
ashaimanmpopmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0302-905935/0302-
906001/0302-916084
Nungua
P.O. Box TN 30, Nungua
nunguamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0302-715352 /0302-715365/
0302-715351
Fax: 0302-715366
Safe Bond P. O. Box CO 1737, Tema
safebondmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr.:  0303-215588/0303-215576 
/0508259158
Somanya P.O. Box 78, Somanya
somanyamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03420-91421Fax: 027-8787060
Spintex C/O P.O.Box 152 Tema,spintexmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0302-816966/7  0249852546
Spintex Martey Tsuru GA-280-0872
spintexmtmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03029468510509184380
Tema Agency (Golden Jubilee) 
Tema Agency(Long Room) -  do - 0303-204768
Tema Agency(Long Room)Tema Community 2 temacomm2mgr@gcb.com.gh 0303-214050/0302-953539
Tema Fishing Harbour P.O. Box CO 281, Fishing Hbr.
temahrbmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0206733090
Tema Ind. Area P.O. Box CS 8202, Tema Ind Area            temaindmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0303-302818/0303-3005750303-306082
Tema Main
P.O. Box CO 152, TemaMgr:0303-202760Fax: 0303-204346
Tema Main temamainmgr@gcb.com.gh
Tema MarketP.O. Box CO173, Tematemamktmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0303-202861/0303-
201422/0303204763/0208174644
Fax: 0303-204763
Tema Meridian GPS GT-021-6504temameridianmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0303-224464
Tetteh Quarshie Circle P. O. Box, LG14, Legonttqmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0302- 506221/0302-506198/9Fax: 0302-506223GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021160
NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS TELEPHONE
KOFORIDUA ZONE
Regional Manager's Office P.O. Box KF 286, Koforidua
koforiduaarea@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03420-26790/03420-26791 
Agogo P.O. Box 74, Agogoagogomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03720-987310244598203/0203229338
Akim Oda
P.O. Box 364, Akim Oda
akimodamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0302915054/0302915079
0244389301/0342922697
Fax:0342922697
Anyinam P.O. Box AY 46, Anyinam
anyinammgr@gcb.com.gh Mgr:054486811102446415455
AsamankeseP.O. Box 167, Asamankese 
asamankesemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03420-91135/03420-91011
0208829746
Donkorkrom
P.O. Box 11, Donkorkrom 
donkorkrommgr@gcb.com.ghMgr :03424-22039/0246711380
0208171598/0342024209
Fax: 0342024209
Juaso P.O. Box 51, Juasojuasomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03422907420209878802
Kade P.O. Box 62, Kadekademgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0241905665/02090433280244892188
Kibi kibimgr@gcb.com.gh
P.O. Box 97, KibiMgr:0342292059/03422920670247654856
Koforidua
P. O. Box  KF 286, Koforiduakoforiduamgr@gcb.com.gh0244796776Mgr:03420-26832/
0342023049/23059/23069
Koforidua Central                                            P.O. Box 268 Koforidua           
koforiduacentralmgr@gcb.com.gh                             Mgr:0208187576/0541076963
Konongo P.O. Box 137, Konongo
konongomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03224911500208411159
Mpraeso P.O. Box MZ 56, Mpraesompraesomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:020-2310400/05433257300264458456
New Tafo P.O. Box 42, New Tafonewtafomgr@gcb.com.gh0208157545Mgr:0244329645/0242651824List of Branches (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 161
NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS TELEPHONE
Nkawkaw P.O. Box 272, Nkawkaw
nkawkawmgr@gcb.com.ghFax: 03431-22105Mgr:03431-22222
Nsawam P.O. Box NW 280, Nsawamnsawammgr@gcb.com.gh0242802633Mgr: 0244312757/0244312757
Suhum P.O. Box 155, Suhumsuhummgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0207270828/0244614613
HO ZONE
Regional Manager's Office P.O. Box HP 164, Ho
areaho@gcb.com.ghMgr:03620-28251
Abor
P. O. Box AB 48, Abor  
abormgr@gcb.com.gh              Mgr: 024-4313679/024-4987062/
020-6458580   Fax:  0278787049  
Aflao P.O. Box AF12, Aflaoaflaomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 050-2098331/024-8809498/024-9695929
Akatsi P.O. Box 39, Akatsiakatsimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 055-7935244
Dambai P. O. Box DM38, Dambaidambaimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0546926488
Dzodze P.O. Box DJ88, Dzodze
dzodzemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03620-91227 
Ho Main P.O. Box HP 164, Hohomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03620-28905
Ho Market P. O. Box HP 841, Ho Markethomktmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:  03620-26459/03620-26491
Ho Polytechnic P. O. Box 164, Ho
hopolymgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03620-27472/03620-27441
Hohoe P.O. Box 178, Hohoehohoemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 020-6882475/020-6881916
Jasikan P.O. Box 85, Jasikanjasikanmgr@gcb.com.gh  Mgr: 05425-98548
Kadjebi P.O. Box 27, Kadjebikadjebimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03620-92950/0249889001
Keta P.O. Box KW 133, Ketaketamgr@gcb.com.ghMrg: 024-3247936/024-4565510GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021162
NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS TELEPHONE
Kpando P.O. Box 70, Kpando
kpandomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr::0507626707
Nkwanta P. O Box 56, Nkwantankwantamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0200608464
Peki P.O. Box 12, Pekipekimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0244313094
Sogakope P.O. Box  SK 8, Sogakopesogakopemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:  03621-92803
KUMASI ZONE
Regional Manager's Office P.O. Box SE 1212,Suame, 
Kumasi areakumasi@gcb.com.ghMgr:03220-31640/0322029001Fax: 03220-23512
              -   do   -
Regional Manager's Secretariat
areaofficekumasi@gcb.com.ghTel: 03220-81812/82812/29001Fax: 03220-23512
Properties & Facilities 
Management Unit P. O Box SE 1212,Suame,KumasiTel: 03220-26468  
Fax:03220-26468
Corporate Office
P. O. Box SE 1212, KumasiTel: 03220-81884/81888 
Fax:  03220-81885
Agona Ashanti P.O. Box 16, Agona Ashanti 
ashantiagonamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03220-91820/0594530677
Ahinsan  P.O. Box 8818, Ahinsan, 
ahinsanmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03220-31964 /03220-33452 
Asafo Market P.O. Box 3696, Asafoasafomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0244774696/0322491121
Bantama P. O. Box PT 80, Kumasi bantamamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:  03220-48820/03220-48821/48822
Bekwai Ashanti P.O. Box 127, Bekwai Ash.
bekwai-ashantimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03224-20204/03224-20143 
Dunkwa-On-OffinP.O. Box 228, Dunkwa-On-Offin 
dunkwamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr::03322-28236/0246952910/
0332228236
Effiduase Ashanti effiduasemgr@gcb.com.ghP.O. Box 10, EffiduaseMgr: 03220-92173List of Branches (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 163
NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS TELEPHONE
Ejisu P.O. Box 49, Ejisu
ejisumgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03220- 94280/03220-99449 
Ejura ejuramgr@gcb.com.ghP.O Box 24, EjuraMgr: 03220-97147/0206650040 
Jubilee House P.O. Box SE 1212, Suame Kumasi jubileemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03220-26366/03220-30819 
Kejetia kejetiamgr@gcb.com.ghP.O. Box 1630, KumasiMgr:03220-44660/03220-30416 
KNUST P. O. UP 35 KNUST, Kumasi knustmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03220-62136/03220-60153/62135 
Kumasi Main P.O. Box 852, Kumasi
kumasimainmgr@gcb.com.gh Mgr:03220-37303/03220-25292
Mampong Ashanti P.O. Box 94, Mampong- Ashanti 
mampongashantimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0500062777/03220-66129/050279188
New Edubiase edubiasemgr@gcb.com.gh
P.O. Box 42, New EdubiaseMgr:0506060114/0506060122 
New Offinso P.O. Box 60, New Offinso
offinsomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0208182789/0548082513
Nkawie P.O Box 69, Nkawienkawiemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03223-92269/98739
Obuasi P.O. Box 290, Obuasiobuasimgr@gcb.com.gh0202479460Mgr:0202482969
Sefwi-Wiawso P.O. Box 59, Sefwi-Wiawso 
sefwiwiawsomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03223-95199
Sofoline P. O. Box SE1212, Kumasi
Sofolinemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0322497988/0322497996/032
2497008
Suame Magazine P. O. Box SE1212, Kumasi
suamemagazinemgr@com.ghMgr: 03224-94383/03224-94372
Tech Junction P. O. Box UP 1151, KNUST, Kumasi 
techjunctionmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0206881894
Yeji P.O. Box 29, Yeji
yejimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0209616831/0500498311/050
0498310
Corporate Banking Ksi P. O. Box 852, Adum, Kumasi
corporate@gcb.com.gh03220-81884/03220-81888
GCNet P.O.Box 3696, Asafo
asafomgr@gcb.com.gh0322032525GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021164
NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS TELEPHONE
RecoveriesP.O.Box 852, Adum Kumasi
creditmonitpring
recoveriesdept@gcb.com.ghMgr:0322494546/03224945440501642512/0556566864
TAMALE ZONE
Regional Manager's Office P.O. Box TL 228, Tamale 
areatamale@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0372026415/0242700879/037
2025715 
Properties & Facilities Office P. O. Box TL 228, Tamale Tel:03720-27276
Bawku bawkumgr@gcb.com.gh
P.O. Box 38, BawkuMgr: 0596915626/0382095691/059
6915627
Bimbillabimbillamgr@gcb.com.gh
P.O. Box 27, BimbillaMgr:0372099137/0243649977/020
5479854/ 
0596915624/5
BoleP.O. Box 24, Bole 
bolemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 059691622/05969156230503785785/0200015800/0246165
683/0203502074
Bolgatanga bolgamgr@gcb.com.gh
P.O. Box 12, BolgatangaMgr: 0596915620/03820-249610596915621
Damongo damongomgr@gcb.com.ghP.O. Box DM 40, DamongoMgr:0596915619/02663406320266345443/0596915618
Kete-Krachikete-krachimgr@gcb.com.ghP.O. Box 13, Kete-krachiMgr: 0596915617/0505567326/054
2409581
0596915616
Lawralawramgr@gcb,com.gh
P.O. Box 92, LawraMgr: 0596915615
0596915614/0392096412/0392096
411
Navrongo navrongomgr@gcb.com.gh
P.O. Box 28, NavrongoMgr:0596915612/02442145060596915613/0208381048
Saboba P.O.Box SB 06, Sabobasabobamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0596915611/0541655645596915610
SalagaP.O. Box SL 7, Salaga
salagamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03720-
95192/0244247757/0596915608
0243609914/0596915609List of Branches (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 165
NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS TELEPHONE
Tamale Aboabo P.O.Box 228 Tamale
tamaleaboabomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0596915628/90372028028/0372028029
Tamale Hospital Road P. O. Box TL. 2240, Tamale 
thospitalroadmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0596915606/0372027278/0536915607
Tamale MainP.O. Box TL 228, Tamale 
tamalemainmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 05969915605/0372022455
0372099346/0596915604
Tamale MarketP.O. Box TL 766, Tamale tamalemktmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0596915603/0372096022/020
8159160 
59691602
Tumu P.O. Box 2, Tumu
tumumgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0596915600/0392097180 
0596915601
Wa P.O. Box 66, Wa
wamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0500999330/05096137610596915599/8   050999330
Walewale P. O Box 91, Walewalewalewalemgr@gcb.com.gh  Mgr:0596915596/0243568303596915597
Yendi
P.O. Box 32, Yendi
yendimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03720-
95241/0596915594/0247262517
0596915595/0372095242/0244548
173
SUNYANI ZONE
Regional Manager's OfficeP.O. Box 34, Sunyani 
sunyaniareamgr@gcb.com.ghArea Mgr: 03520-25957/03520-
24084 
Akumadan P.O. Box 33 Akumadan
akumadanmgr@gcb.com.gh244313714
Bechem P.O. Box 69, Bechem bechemmgr@gcb.com.gh508589408
Berekum P.O. Box 115, Berekumberekummgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:  03522-22567/03522-22193 Fax:03522-22042
DormaaAhenkroP.O. Box: 16, Dormaa Ahenkro
dormaamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03523-22047/03523-
90759/03520-96115/ 03520-96124
Fax: 027-8787012
Drobo P. O. Box 27, Japekromdrobomgr@gcb. Com.gh500450009
Duayaw Nkwanta duayaw-nkwantamgr@gcb.com.ghP.O. Box 66, DuayawNkwanta209126053GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021166
NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS TELEPHONE
Goaso goasomgr@gcb.com.gh
P.O. Box 83,Goaso 505438683
Hwidiem P.O. Box 11, Hwidiemhwidiemmgr@gcb.com.gh 209808042
Kintampo P.O. Box 31, Kintampokintampomgr@gcb.com.gh03520-92047
Mim P.O. Box 33, Mimmimmgr@gcb.com.gh505252483
Nkoranza P.O. Box 44, Nkoranzankoranzamgr@gcb.com.gh03520-92076 
Sampa P. O. Box 90, Sampa, sampamgr@gcb.com.gh244341751
Sankore Private Post Bag, Sankoresankoremgr@gcb.com.gh244313638
Sunyani Main  P.O. Box 34, Sunyani sunyanimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03520-27716/27157Fax: 03520-27087
Sunyani MarketP. O. Box 325, Sunyani 
sunyanimktmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03520-24267/03520-
24103/03520-24193
Fax:  03520-24474
Techiman Main P.O. Box TM 196, Techimantechimanmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0500459100 Fax: 03525-22048
Techiman Market P. O. Box TM 796, Techiman
techimanmktmgr@gcb.com.gh 03525-22395/ 22394 Fax: 03525-22394
Tepa P.O. Box 103, Tepa, tepamgr@gcb.com.gh352196789
Wenchi P.O. Box WC 49, Wenchi   
wenchimgr@gcb.com.gh                           352195282Fax: 03521-95282
TAKORADI ZONE
Regional Manager's Office P.O. Box 475, Takoradi 
tadiareamgr@gcb.com.gh 03120-24948/03120-23072/ 22355Fax: 03120-25226
Corporate Banking
            -     do    -Tel:03120-26700/Fax: 03120-25226List of Branches (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 167
NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS TELEPHONE
Axim P.O. Box 55, Axim 
aximmgr@gcb.com.gh0312198734/0312198735
Bogoso bogosomgr@gcb.com.ghP.O. Box 42, Bogoso 03120-92655/0277801256
Dadieso dadiesomgr@gcb.com.ghPrivate Mail Bag, Dadieso 0244335687/0205184861Fax: 0277900136
Eluboelubomgr@gcb.com.gh
P. O. Box 134, Elubo 03122-90714/0312222545 / 
0312222544
Fax: 03122-22546
Enchi P.O. Box 15, Enchi enchimgr@gcb.com.gh03121-93988 
GCNET Elubo             -     do   - 03122-90714
Half-Assini P.O. Box 54, Half-Assinihalf-assinimgr@gcb.com.gh312297841
Prestea P.O. Box 102, Prestea
presteamgr@gcb.com.gh 03120-92670/0277801254Fax: 0277900138
SamreboiP.O. Box S 40, Samreboi
samreboimgr@gcb.com.gh0502459088/0277811205/03122-
92708
Fax: 0278787066
Sekondi P.O. Box 101, Sekondi sekondimgr@gcb.com.gh03120-46511/0312046746 Fax: 0312946746
Takoradi Harbour P.O. Box 707, Takoradi tadihbrmgr@gcb.com.gh0312022731/0312022534Fax:0312027309
Takoradi Maintadimainmgr@gcb.com.gh 
P. O. Box 475, Takoradi03122-95471/ 
0312295472/0312297650
Fax:0312023540
Takoradi Market CircleP.O. Box MC 098, Takoradi 
tadimktmgr@gcb.com.gh 0312022731/03039-
62099/0312023569
Fax: 03125370
Tarkwa
P. O. Box 90, Tarkwatarkwamgr@gcb.com.gh 03123-20374/22534
0247817921/0242964302
Fax: 0312320374
CAPE COAST ZONE
Regional Manager's Office P.O. Box 65, Cape Coast 
areacapecoast@gcb.com.gh 03321-30440/03321-37887 Fax: 03321-32625
Abura Dunkwa P.O. Box 29, Abura Dunkwa aburadunkwamgr@gcb.com.gh03321-91964GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021168
NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS TELEPHONE
Agona Swedru
P.O. Box 186, Agona Swedru  
agonaswedrumgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03320-21071 /0203054198
0332-020291/ 0332-093918
Fax:03320-20414
Assin Fosu P.O. Box  76, Assin Fosu
assinfosumgr@gcb.com.gh507465096
Breman Asikuma P.O. Box 60, Breman-Asikumabremanmgr@gcb.com.gh0246-339233Fax:0277900128
Cape Coast Coronation 
Junction   P. O. Box  363, Cape Coast 
Capecoastcjuncmgr@gcb.com.gh                              (0)240 459 472/0247966760
Cape Coast Main P.O. Box 65, Cape Coast capecoastmainmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:033-2134253, (0)33 2132354 Fax:03321-32549
Elmina elminamgr@gcb.com.gh
P. O. Box EL 113 Elmina Mgr: 03320-94899
Mankessim
P.O. Box 78, Mankessim 
mankessimmgr@gcb.com.ghFax:0277 900113
0555231015/0505709111Mgr:(0)332 191 435
Saltpond saltpondmgr@gcb.com.gh
P.O. Box SP 096, SaltpondMgr:0241946490/03321-92003
Twifu Praso P.O. Box TW 84, Twifu Praso
twifuprasomgr@gcb.com.gh244314810Fax: 027 7900 124
University of Cape Coast capecoastunimgr@gcb.com.ghP.O. Box 046, Cape CoastMgr:0312293427/0332096388Fax: 03321-36377
Winneba P.O. Box 128, Winnebawinnebamgr@gcb.com.gh03323 22133/03323-21064Fax:03323-22133List of Branches (Continued)GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021 169
NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS TELEPHONE
REGIONAL OFFICES
AccraP.O. Box K.96 Accra New Town
areaaccra@gcb.com.ghArea Mgr: 0302-249772/0302-
225928, 222641 
Fax: 0302-236671
Cape Coast P.O. Box 65, Cape Coast
areacapecoast@gcb.com.gh03321-32625,37887 Fax: 03321-32625
Ho P.O. Box 164, Hoareaho@gcb.com.gh03620-28251,26543 Fax:03620-27598
Koforidua P.O. Box KF286, Koforiduakoforiduaarea@gcb.com.gh03420-26790/26791Fax:03420-23042
Kumasi P.O. Box SE 1212 Suame, Kumasiareakumasi@gcb.com.gh03220-31604,29001Fax:03220-23512
Sunyani P.O. Box 34, Sunyani areasunyanimgr@gcb.com.gh03520-25957/8, 24084 Fax: 03520-27162
Takoradi P. O. Box 475, Takoradi
tadiareamgr@gcb.com.gh03120-23072/22355/24948Fax: 03120-25226
Tamale P.O. Box 228, Tamale 
areatamale@gcb.com.gh03720-26415, 25715,22999Fax: 03720-22765
Tema P. O. Box CO152, Temaareatema@gcb .com.gh0303-204824Fax: 0303-204824GCB Bank Plc Annual Report 2021170
GCB BANK PLC 
INVITATION  AND  FORM  OF PROXY  
 
To be held at 10.00am on Friday, June 03, 2022 and streamed live. 
 
Dear Member(s) 
In compliance with Imposition of Restriction Act 2020 (Act 1012), the Registrar General’s Department and Securities and Exchange 
Commission directives and guidance on holding virtual Annual General meeting (AGM), and as part of measures to contain COVID-19, 
attendance and participation by members or their proxies in this year’s annual general meeting of the Bank, shall be strictly virtual (by 
online participation). 
A member is entitled to attend and vote at the Annual General Meeting and may appoint a proxy to attend and vote on his/her behalf (via online 
participation). Such a proxy need not be a member of the Company. 
The appointment of a proxy will not prevent a member from subsequently attending and voting at the meeting (via online participation). Where 
a member participates online, the proxy appointment shall be deemed to be revoked. 
A copy of the Form of Proxy can be downloaded from: https://gcbbankagm.com and may be completed and sent via email to: 
shareregistry@gcb.com.gh or deposited at the registered office of the Registrar of the Company, Share Registry, GCB Bank PLC, High 
Street, Accra or posted to the Registrar at PO Box 134, Accra to arrive not later than 10.00 GMT on Wednesday, June 01, 2022. 
 PROXY FORM 
RESOLUTION FOR AGAINST NOTES 
 
1.!Provision has been 
made for the Chairman 
of the Meeting to act as 
your proxy, but you may 
wish to name any 
person to attend the 
meeting and vote on 
your behalf. 
 
2.!In case of joint holders, 
each holder should 
sign 
 
3 If executed by a 
Company/ 
Corporation, the form 
should bear the 
Common Seal or be 
signed on its behalf by a 
Director. 
 
4. For a postal proxy, 
please sign and post it 
so as to reach the GCB 
Share Registry not 
later than 10a.m. on 
Wednesday, June 01, 
2022.  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
        
 
I/We ............................................................................................................... .................. being a member(s) of GCB Bank PLC 
 
Hereby appoint ................................................................................................ or failing whom, the Chairman of the Meeting as my/our proxy to vote for 
me/us on my/our(   behalf at the Virtual Annual Meeting of the Company to be held at 10am on June 03, 2022 and at any adjournment therefore. 
 
  
……………………… …… 
Signed this …………… …. Day of ……… …..2022 Shareholder(s) Signature 
 
See overleaf :- Accessing and Voting at the Virtual AGM 1. To consider and adopt the Financial Statements of the Company for the year ended
December 31, 2021 together with the Reports of the Directors and Auditors
thereon. 
2. To declare a Dividend for the year ended December 31, 2021 subject to Bank of Ghana 
approval  
3. To re-elect the following Directors retiring by rotation: 
I. Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III 
II. Mr. Francis Arthur Collins 
III. Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah 
4. To re-elect a Director in line with the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance 
Directive 2018 
I. Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu 
5. To ratify the appointment of two (2) Non-Executive Directors 
I. Daniel Tweneboah Asirifi Esq. 
II. Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah 
6. To ratify the appointment of an Executive Director – Wholesale & Investment
I. Samuel Kwame Yedu Aidoo 
7. To fix the remuneration of Directors 
8. To authorize the Directors tofixtheremunerationofAuditors.
ADVERT
GCB BANK PLC 
INVITATION  AND  FORM  OF PROXY  
 
To be held at 10.00am on Friday, June 03, 2022 and streamed live. 
 
Dear Member(s) 
In compliance with Imposition of Restriction Act 2020 (Act 1012), the Registrar General’s Department and Securities and Exchange 
Commission directives and guidance on holding virtual Annual General meeting (AGM), and as part of measures to contain COVID-19, 
attendance and participation by members or their proxies in this year’s annual general meeting of the Bank, shall be strictly virtual (by 
online participation). 
A member is entitled to attend and vote at the Annual General Meeting and may appoint a proxy to attend and vote on his/her behalf (via online 
participation). Such a proxy need not be a member of the Company. 
The appointment of a proxy will not prevent a member from subsequently attending and voting at the meeting (via online participation). Where 
a member participates online, the proxy appointment shall be deemed to be revoked. 
A copy of the Form of Proxy can be downloaded from: https://gcbbankagm.com and may be completed and sent via email to: 
shareregistry@gcb.com.gh or deposited at the registered office of the Registrar of the Company, Share Registry, GCB Bank PLC, High 
Street, Accra or posted to the Registrar at PO Box 134, Accra to arrive not later than 10.00 GMT on Wednesday, June 01, 2022. 
 PROXY FORM 
RESOLUTION FOR AGAINST NOTES 
 
1.!Provision has been 
made for the Chairman 
of the Meeting to act as 
your proxy, but you may 
wish to name any 
person to attend the 
meeting and vote on 
your behalf. 
 
2.!In case of joint holders, 
each holder should 
sign 
 
3 If executed by a 
Company/ 
Corporation, the form 
should bear the 
Common Seal or be 
signed on its behalf by a 
Director. 
 
4. For a postal proxy, 
please sign and post it 
so as to reach the GCB 
Share Registry not 
later than 10a.m. on 
Wednesday, June 01, 
2022.  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
        
 
I/We ............................................................................................................... .................. being a member(s) of GCB Bank PLC 
 
Hereby appoint ................................................................................................ or failing whom, the Chairman of the Meeting as my/our proxy to vote for 
me/us on my/our(   behalf at the Virtual Annual Meeting of the Company to be held at 10am on June 03, 2022 and at any adjournment therefore. 
 
  
……………………… …… 
Signed this …………… …. Day of ……… …..2022 Shareholder(s) Signature 
 
See overleaf :- Accessing and Voting at the Virtual AGM 1. To consider and adopt the Financial Statements of the Company for the year ended
December 31, 2021 together with the Reports of the Directors and Auditors
thereon. 
2. To declare a Dividend for the year ended December 31, 2021 subject to Bank of Ghana 
approval  
3. To re-elect the following Directors retiring by rotation: 
I. Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III 
II. Mr. Francis Arthur Collins 
III. Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah 
4. To re-elect a Director in line with the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance 
Directive 2018 
I. Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu 
5. To ratify the appointment of two (2) Non-Executive Directors 
I. Daniel Tweneboah Asirifi Esq. 
II. Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah 
6. To ratify the appointment of an Executive Director – Wholesale & Investment
I. Samuel Kwame Yedu Aidoo 
7. To fix the remuneration of Directors 
8. To authorize the Directors tofixtheremunerationofAuditors.
Accessing and Voting at the Virtual AGM   
 
• A unique token number  will be sent to you by email, SMS or by post from May 20, 2022 to give you acces s 
to the mee ting. Shar eholders who do not receive this token can contact the Shar e Registry at: 
shareregistr y@gcb.com.gh  or call 0302 668712  / 0244 -33850 8 / 0244 -358514 / 0244 -3180 79  to be sent 
the uni que toke n.  
 
• To gain  access to the Virtual AGM,  shareholders must visit https://gc bbankagm.com and input their  
unique token number  on Friday , June 03, 202 2.  
 
• For shareholders who do not submi t proxy forms to the Registrar  of the Compa ny prior to the mee ting, 
they ma y vote e lectronica lly during the V irtual AGM again us ing their  unique t oken number .  
 
• Further assistance on acces sing the mee ting and voti ng electronically can be foun d on 
https://gcbba nkag m.com  
 
• The AGM Proceedin gs would be streamed Live on GTV, Facebook,  Twitter, YouTube and Instagram  for 
shareholders’ obs ervation and par ticipat ion.  ADVERT
ADVERT
www .gcbban k.com. gh2021
Scan to download
e-versionSocial Media Handles & Other Contact Details
GCB Bank ’s O/uniFB03cial 
WhatsApp Line
  GCBBankPLC
www.gcbban k.com.gh
 66 6 66 -8
 6 8-
 6 8-6

Extracted from: GCB BANK AR 2020 FINAL WEB.pdf
PROFILE OF GCB BANK LTD
GCB Bank Limited (GCB) is Ghana’s first indigenous and the largest bank with over 180 branches and 300 ATMs 
nationwide. With over 67 years banking experience and rated as Ghana’s safest bank, GCB has undergone various transformations with the view of being the dominant player in Ghana’s banking industry. The Bank seeks to consistently 
provide world class services and superior value to customers, shareholders and other stakeholders.
HISTORY AND KEY MILESTONES
GCB was established in May 1953 as the Bank of the Gold Coast to provide banking services to indigenous businesses 
to help drive the country’s socio-economic development. In 1957, when Ghana attained independence, the Bank of Ghana was established as the Central Bank. The Bank of the Gold Coast was then renamed Ghana Commercial Bank 
Limited to focus speci fic ally on commercial banking activities.
In 1996, it listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange and in 2014, the Bank rebranded from Ghana Commercial Bank Limited to GCB Bank Limited to  refresh its image and project a renewed dynamism.
In 2017, GCB purchased and assumed some specific assets and liabilities of two indigenous banks in a single day, as 
part of its strategy of total market dominance.
The bigger and better GCB is currently focused on revenue growth and profitability, operational excellence and talent 
development to deliver world class services and superior value to stakeholders.
GCB Bank Limited
www.gcbbank.com.gh
V MVISION MISSION
To be the leading Bank
in all our markets.To provide ﬁrst class banking 
solutions for all our customers 
and value for all our 
stakeholders. Notice of Annual General Meeting   
Corporate Information
Board of Directors     
Executive Committee (EXCO)      
Five Year Financial Summary   
Financial Highlights   
Chairman’s Statement   
Managing Director’s Review  
Report of the Directors  
Corporate Governance Statement   
Independent Auditor’s Report  
Statements of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income
Statements of Financial Position  
Statements of Changes in Equity  
Statements of Cash Flows  
Notes to the Financial Statements
Value Added Statement  
Shareholders’ Information  
Agents/Correspondent Banks
List of Branches
Invitation and Form of Proxy
CONTENTS
05
21
52
14306
22
54
14507
26
55
14714
30
59
16319
46
14237
61As at 31st December 2020, Social Security and National 
Insurance Trust (SSNIT) had 29.89% shares in the Bank, while the Government of Ghana had 21.36% and various 
institutions and individuals held 48.75% of the shares.Shareholding Structure
GCB prides itself as Ghana’s most welcoming bank, 
offering accessible ﬁn ancial support wherever it is needed 
through helpful service and expert solutions, to encourage 
business and enrich people’s lives. 
The Bank’s service proposition is structured to serve every 
facet of the customer’s life-cycle and all types of 
businesses operating in diverse sectors of the economy 
irrespective of size. The Bank has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs of Ghanaian residents abroad.
GCB’s service proposition is anchored by a strong asset 
base, competitive pricing, an unmatched branch network, extensive ATM network, strong investment in technology 
and infrastructure, robust risk management systems, 
strong governance structures and a fundamental understanding of customer needs driven by a mix of experience, strong customer relationship management and an unrelenting pursuit for excellence.    
GCB is noted for its strong CSR initiatives in the areas of 
Education, Health, Culture, Tourism, Environment and Sports.  
In 2020, GCB Bank invested GHS8.04million in CSR activities 
compared to GHS10.43million in 2019.
The Bank is at the forefront of the Covid-19 ﬁg ht and it was 
the ﬁr st Bank to make a donation of GHS100,000.00 to the 
COVID-19 National Response Team through the Ministry of Health. Other initiatives include a donation of 100 veronica 
buckets and their accessories to the Ministry of Sanitation 
and Water Resources, and a donation of 40 jumbo water storage tanks to Ministry of Local Government and Rural 
Development for distribution to markets in Accra, Tema and 
other parts of the country. 
The Bank also donated 550 gallons of hand sanitizers, 50 
Veronica buckets, 50 receptacles, 100 gallons of liquid soap 
and 300 rolls of tissue for distribution to regional offices and 
courts under the judiciary, the provision of nutritious meals, 
water and drink on daily basis for 650 medical doctors and 
other frontline health workers for almost two months, amongst others.
Over the past year, some of the the Bank’s other notable 
initiatives include the renovation of the Usher Fort Clinic and 
construction of an Operating Theatre for the Clinic, sponsorship of the National Science and Maths Quiz, Ghana’s 
Fastest Human, Millennium Marathon, The Pan African 
Historical Theatre Festival (PANAFEST) and ﬁn ancial support 
to Akwapim Educational Trust Fund, Tweneboa Kodua 
Secondary School, Ammissakrom - Ekroful Basic School, 
Bomaa Roman Catholic JHS, Acherensua Senior High School 
amongst others.GCB is rated Ghana’s safest Bank by Moody’s, Standard & 
Poor’s and Fitch and the most compliant Bank in Africa 
by the Association for Certi ﬁe d Compliance Professionals 
in Africa (ACCPA).
The Bank has won numerous awards in the industry. 
Notable among them are:
• The Best Bank in Ghana in Anti-Money Laundering 
(AML) Compliance and Africa’s Best Bank in Compliance 
(2019)
• Most Compliant Bank 2017/2018 - The Association of 
Certiﬁed Compliance Professionals Africa (ACCPA)
• Safest Bank in Ghana - Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s and 
Fitch 2017
• Best Money Transfer Bank in Ghana - RIA 2017 
• Most Active E-zwich Bank – 2017.GCB believes that technology is a key driver for improving 
efficiency, business performance, customer engagement, 
proﬁt ability and growth in today’s ever-changing and 
challenging banking environment. Therefore, the Bank is 
relentlessly pursing innovative ways of leveraging on technologies to deliver end-to-end digital banking solutions to enhance its service offerings and deliver even superior value. 
In 2020, GCB Bank became the ﬁr st Bank to launch a 
digital mobile money wallet when it launched the G-Money product in January. The digital wallet which is telco agnostic and fully interoperable allows customers to send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank accounts by registered users and also perform unique functions including saving and borrowing funds, 
group savings among others. It is also accessible across 
multiple channels such as Unstructured Supplementary Service Data (USSD), GCB Bank’s internet banking platform, Mobile banking application, Point of Sale Device (POS), Quick Respond Code (QR Code) and Automated Teller Machines (ATMs).
Ratings & Awards WonService Proposition Technology & Innovation
Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR)
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 15 GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notice of Annual General Meeting
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN  that the Annual General Meeting of GCB 
Bank Limited will be held virtually and streamed live online via https://
gcbbankagm.com, the Bank’s social media handles (Facebook, Instagram, YouTube and Twitter) and  GTV on Friday, 28th May, 2021 at 10:00 a.m. to transact the following business:
Agenda
1.  Ordinary Business/Resolutions
a. To consider and adopt the Financial Statements of the Company for 
the year ended December 31, 2020 together with the Reports of the Directors and Auditors thereon.
b. To declare a Dividend for the year ended December 31, 2020.
c. To re-elect the following Directors retiring by rotation:
• Mr. Jude Ko ﬁ  Arthur
• Mrs. Lydia Essah
• Mr. Nik Amartei ﬁo
d. To re-elect the following Directors:
• Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins
• Mr. Osmani Ayuba
• Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
e. To ratify the appointment of two (2) Executive Directors
• Managing Director – Mr. John Ko ﬁ A domakoh
• Deputy Managing Director, Operations – Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey
f. To approve the remuneration of Directors
g. To authorize the Directors to ﬁx th e remuneration of Auditors
2.  Special Business/Resolutions
a. To change the name GCB Bank Limited to GCB Bank PLC in accordance with the provisions of section 21(1)(b) of the Companies Act 2019 (Act 992)
b. To amend the Bank’s Constitution in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2019 (Act 992).
DATED THIS 25TH DAY OF MARCH, 2021
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD
(SGD.)
Amma Agyeman Kusi-Appouh
Company Secretary
Notes
1. I n compliance with Imposition of Restriction Act 2020 (Act 1012), the Registrar General’s Department and Securities and 
Exchange Commission directives and guidance on holding virtual AGMs, and as part of measures to contain COVID-19, 
attendance and participation by members or their proxies in this year’s annual general meeting of the Bank, shall be strictly virtual (by online participation).
2. A m ember entitled to attend and vote or may appoint a proxy to attend (via online participation) and vote on his or her behalf 
either online or by post. Such a proxy need not be a member of the company.  For a proxy to be valid for the purposes of the meeting, it must be completed and submitted via shareregistry@gcb.com.gh or deposited at the Share Registry, GCB Bank Limited, Head Office, High Street, Accra, not less than 48 hours before the meeting.  
3. A c opy of the Proxy Form can be downloaded from: https://gcbbankagm.com  and may be ﬁl led and sent via email to: 
shareregistry@gcb.com.gh.
4. T he appointment of a proxy will not prevent a member from subsequently attending and voting at the meeting (via online 
participation). Where a member attends the meeting in person (participates online), the proxy appointment shall be deemed to be revoked
.
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 16 GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1DIRECTORS Mr. Jude Ko ﬁ  Arthur                       (Board Chairman)
Mr. John Ko ﬁ A domakoh                (Managing Director appointed 12/11/20)
Mr. Socrates Afram                                    (DMD Finance)
Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey   (DMD-Operations appointed 20/01/21)
Mr. Nik Amartei ﬁo                                      (Non-Executive Director)
Mrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah                     (Non-Executive Director)
Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III                     (Non-Executive Director)
Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah                         (Non-Executive Director)
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba                        (Non-Executive Director)
Mr. Francis Arthur Collins                          (Non-Executive Director)
Alhaji Ahassan Yakubu                              (Non-Executive Director)
Mr. Prince Edward Amoatia Younge (Non-Executive Director)
Mr. Ransford Anselm Sowah                                          (Managing Director resigned 30/09/20)
Mr. Samuel Amankwah                                      (DMD-Operations resigned 1/05/20)
SECRETARY Ms. Amma Agyeman Kusi-Appouh
GCB Building,  
Thorpe Road, High Street 
P. O. Box 134, Accra
AUDITOR Deloitte & Touche  
Chartered Accountants  
The Deloitte Place, Plot No. 71  
Off George Walker Bush Highway North Dzorwulu  
P.O.Box GP 453  
Accra,
REGISTRAR Share Registry  
GCB Bank Limited, Head Office, High Street, Accra
REGISTERED OFFICE GCB Building,  
Thorpe Road, High Street P. O. Box 134, AccraCorporate InformationBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
 Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 17 GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Board of Directors
Nana Ama Ayensua 
Saara III
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera 
Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Ransford Anselm Sowah
Managing Director resigned 
30/09/20Mr. Osmani Aludiba 
Ayuba
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Nik Amarteiﬁo
Non-Executive Director
Alhaji Ahassan Yakubu
Non- Executive Director
Mr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD-Operations resigned 
1/05/20Mr. Francis Arthur 
Collins
Non-Executive DirectorDMD-Operations appointed 
20/01/21
Mr. Emmanuel Ray 
Ankrah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Prince Edward 
Amoatia Younge
Non- Executive DirectorBoard ChairmanMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur
Managing Director appointed 
12/11/20Mr. John Koﬁ Adomakoh
DMD FinanceMr. Socrates AframMr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey   
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 18
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1Directors’ Profiles
Mr. Jude Kofi Arthur 
Board Chairman
Jude is an Independent Non- Executive Director of the Bank appointed in 
2017. He is the Chairman of the Board and a Banker with over 30 years’ experience in Banking. He also serves on the Board of Ghana International Bank Plc.
Jude graduated from the University of Ghana Business School with a 
Second Class Upper degree in 1976. He is an honorary fellow of the Chartered Institute of Bankers Ghana. He commenced his Banking career in Merchant Bank Ghana Limited, now UMB, in 1978 where he rose to head the Corporate Finance Division of the Bank and became a Director of Merban Investment Holdings Limited, a subsidiary of the Bank. 
In 1994, together with a group of investors, he set up First Atlantic Merchant 
Bank Limited (FAMBL) now First Atlantic Bank and was appointed the 
ﬁr
st 
Managing Director of the Bank in 1994. He served as Managing Director until 2012 when he retired honourably.
He has acquired extensive executive education and is associated with such 
renowned and prestigious institutions as Harvard Business School, INSEAD- France, Wharton Business School- University of Pennsylvania, Templeton College- Oxford University, Stanford University, National University of Singapore (NUS), Ashridge Institute of Management, Euromoney Training School and the International Centre for Monetary and Banking Studies in Geneva.
Mr. John Kofi Adomakoh
Managing Director
Koﬁ is a seasoned banker with over 25 years’ experience, 15 of which have 
been at Executive Management level. Ko ﬁ
 joins GCB Bank Limited (GCB) from 
African Export-Import Bank headquartered in Cairo where he worked as a 
Director & Global Head, Project and Asset-Based Finance. Prior to that, he held leadership roles at Barclays Bank Ghana Limited (now ABSA Bank Ghana Limited), The Trust Bank Ghana Limited and Ecobank Ghana Limited.
Ko
ﬁ 
has worth of experience in International, Corporate and Institutional and 
Transaction Banking, Development Finance, Project and Export Finance, with 
a track record in delivering business transformation and high-quality outcomes.
He led and structured several transactions worth over USD10 billion across the 
African continent (both public and private sector) in different industry including manufacturing, health, telecom, energy (including oil and gas), transport (ports, airports, rails and roads), mining and agriculture among others.
Ko
ﬁ
 is an inspiring and energetic leader who is widely known for his 
collaborative leadership style and for building high performance teams. Ko
ﬁ
 holds an Executive Masters’ Degree in Business Administration and a 
Bachelor of Science in Agriculture from the University of Ghana, Legon.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 19
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1Directors’ Profiles  (cont’d)
Mr. Socrates Afram
Deputy Managing Director, Finance
Socrates is a ﬁn ance professional with 20 years’ experience in the Financial 
Services Sector. He has a breadth of experience across strategy; business per -
formance and reporting ( ﬁn
ancial, regulatory and statutory); debt and capital 
raising; business combination; investment and risk management. 
Other positions held include:
•
 F
inance Director of Fidelity Bank Limited.
•
 H
ead of Research and Head of Business Performance & Financial Control, 
Fidelity Bank Ltd.
•
 H
e worked with UBA (Ghana) as Senior Analyst deputizing for the Financial 
Controller. 
•
 H
e also worked with Export Finance Company Limited as Head of Finance & 
Administration and General Leasing & Finance Company Limited as Analyst 
for lease credit applications. 
Socrates is a fellow of the Association of Chartered Certi
ﬁe
d Accountants 
(ACCA), He holds a Master of Business Administration (Finance) degree from the University of Ghana Business School and a Bachelor of Commerce degree from the University of Cape Coast. He is an alumnus of the Wharton Executive Education, University of Pennsylvania, USA.
Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey
Deputy Managing Director- Operations
Emmanuel is a seasoned Banker who brings on board over 20 years’ multinational experience, working for listed companies in corporate and retail Banking, asset management, securities, brokerage services, pensions, insurance and micro-
ﬁn
ance with operations in over 30 African countries. 
He started his career with KPMG and has since held other positions including Chief Financial Officer – WAMZ at Ecobank Ghana; Group Head, Finance at Ecobank Transnational Incorporated (Togo), Group Chief Operating Officer, Letshego Holdings Limited (Botswana) and Executive Business Manager to the Group CEO - Alexander Forbes Group Holdings (South Africa). Emmanuel also held several roles with Standard Bank of South Africa Group in South Africa and Ghana.
Mr. Lamptey holds a Bachelor of Commerce degree from University of Cape 
Coast, Ghana and is a fellow of Association of Chartered Certi
ﬁe
d Accountants 
ACCA), United Kingdom.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 110
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Mrs. Lydia Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mrs. Essah is an Independent Non-Executive Director of the Bank and the 
Chairperson of the Risk and Compliance Committee of the Bank. She brings to the Board a wealth of banking experience which spans over 30 years in GCB Bank Limited, beginning at the branch level and culminating in the position of Chief Manager and Area Manager of the Tema Zone.
As a seasoned Bank Executive, she has a demonstrated record of exceed -
ing pro
ﬁ
t targets, turning around underperforming units and driving in -
creased revenue and market share.Mrs. Essah possesses relevant experience including risk management, 
compliance and corporate governance concepts, strategy formulation and implementation that  contributes to appropriate oversight of  Banking ac -
tivities for the bene
ﬁt
 of its shareholders, customers, employees and other 
stakeholders. 
Additionally, she has demonstrated over a long period of time personal 
integrity, structured and strategic thinking and analytical capability to guide major decisions. She has leveraged her leadership and communication skills to lead signi
ﬁc
ant negotiations and dialogue with senior executives 
and colleague board members.
Mrs. Essah holds a master’s degree from GIMPA (Ghana Institute of Man -
agement and Public Administration), MPhil and a bachelor’s degree from 
the University of Ghana. She also has numerous professional development certi
ﬁc
ates and programs from both international and national levels.
Mr. Nik Amarteifio
Non-Executive Director
Nik is a Non-Executive Director and Chairman of the Board of Nominations 
and Monitoring Committee of the Bank. He is the majority shareholder of Dannex Ayrton Starwin PLC, one of the largest indigenous owned pharma -
ceutical companies in Ghana in partnership with SSNIT.
He served on the Board of Bank of Ghana from 2001 – 2008. He also 
served on the Board of several Toronto Stock Exchange Listed Companies (TSE) such as the International Gold Resources from 1993 – 1996, which was sold to Ashanti Gold
ﬁe
lds in 1996.
He served as a member of the Ghana Investments Advisory Council (GIAC), a committee set up by ex-president J. A. Kuffour to provide investment advice to the government, from 2001 – 2008.
Mr. Amartei
ﬁo i
s currently the Vice Chair of Ghana Agro Foods Company 
Limited (GAFCO), He is a Board member of the African American Institute, a premier U.S. 
based organization dedicated to advancing Africa’s development through higher education and skills training.
He is also the Vice Chairman for Accra Great Olympics Football Club.He holds an MBA from the Harvard Business School and a BA Economics, 
Wesleyan University, USA.Directors’ Profiles  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 111
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba 
Non-Executive Director
Osmani is a Non-Executive Director and the Chairman of the Procurement 
Committee of the Bank. He is a professional Accountant and Procurement Expert who has worked with Ernst and Young, Eastern Bells, Community Water and Sanitation Agency (DANIDA Project), the United Nations Population Fund, EngenderHealth Ghana, West Africa Trade Hub- Ghana, Parliamentary Centre- Africa, Stanbic Bank Ghana and Ghana Agricultural Sector Investment Programme.  He is currently the Managing Director of Northern Electricity Distribution Company Limited (NEDCo)
He is a Member, Institute of Chartered Accountants, Ghana; Member of 
Chartered Institute of Procurement & Supply and holds MA Economic Policy Management and B.Com from the University of Ghana and University of Cape-Coast respectively.
Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins is an Independent Non-Executive Director, and 
the Chairman of the Board Cybersecurity and Information Technology Governance Committee of the Bank. He is an Information Technology Consultant with over 35 years’ experience in the IT industry. He has in-depth knowledge in the deployment of IT tools and concepts for re-engineering business processes, to enhance customer service delivery and improve productivity. He drew a lot of experience from engaging in IT consultancy services by executing various IT projects both home and abroad.
Mr. Arthur-Collins is a Fellow of the Ghana Institute of Information 
Technology (GH); a Member of the Institute for the Management of Information Systems (UK); and a Member of the British Computer Society (UK). He holds Master’s Degree in Information Technology and Business Administration (IT-MBA) from University of Leicester (UK); Professional Certi
ﬁc
ate in Structured Systems Analysis and Design from National Centre 
for Information Technology, Manchester (UK); and DP in Data Processing from University of Science and Technology, Kumasi (GH). His skill set includes professional training in Information Technology Management and IT Strategic Planning, Project Management from National University of Singapore Institute of Systems Science (NUS) as well as Management Security from Galilee International Management Institute, Israel.
Mr. Arthur-Collins worked with the Ghana Ports and Harbours Authority 
from 1985 to 2012, where he established the Information Technology department, and rose to the position of “Head-of-IT” with oversight responsibility for all IT systems and resources at both Tema and Takoradi ports, a position he held until he retired from the Ghana Ports and Harbours Authority in 2012.Directors’ Profiles  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 112
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1Directors’ Profiles  (cont’d)
Nana Ama AYensua Saara III
Non-Executive Director
Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III is the Omanhemaa of the Denkyira Traditional 
Area in the Central Region of Ghana. She is a Non-Executive Director of the Bank and the Chairperson of the Board HR and Remuneration Committee.
Currently, Nana is the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of Nasaa Group of 
Companies and serves on the Board of Government Special initiatives. She holds B.Com from the University of Cape Coast and Diploma in Business Studies, Takoradi Polytechnic. 
On the chieftaincy and cultural fronts, Nana has served on several Boards and 
Committees to promote traditional governance.
Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah 
Non-Executive Director
Ray is an Independent Non-Executive Director and the Chairman of the 
Audit Committee of the Bank. He is an experienced Chartered Accountant and Chartered Global Management Accountant with solid technical knowledge and excellent communication skills, strong analytical skills and an effective team player. 
He is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Ghana and a 
Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (UK), Fellow of the British Society of Commerce. He holds a post graduate diploma in Strategic Financial Management from Kingston University in the UK. 
He is currently the Deputy Chief Executive (Finance and Administration) of 
Ghana Cocoa Board and the Board Chairman of National Insurance Commission.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 113
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1Directors’ Profiles  (cont’d)
Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu 
Non-Executive Director
Alhaji Yakubu is a Non- Executive Director and the Chairman for the Board 
Credit Committee of the Bank. He is an experienced Banker who commenced his career with Merchant Bank Ghana Limited in September 1991 and later joined Bank of Ghana. He is currently a business executive.  
He holds MBA Finance (part 1) from the University of Ghana, Legon; 
Certi
ﬁc
ate from the Financial Institution Analysis School of the Federal 
Reserve Bank, Washington DC; B.Sc. Administration, Banking & Finance, University of Ghana, Legon. 
He has deep knowledge and experience in Financial Institution Analysis, 
Corporate Governance, Credit Management, Treasury and Investment Management, Internal Controls, Computer Audit and Security, Compliance, Evaluation and Monitoring. 
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive Director
Edward is an Independent Non-Executive Director and currently the 
Chairman of the Electronic Payments and G-Money Committee of the Bank. He is a Marketing professional with over 30 years’ experience in industry and consultancy.
He worked with British American Tobacco (BAT Gh), CAMELOT Ghana 
Limited and PASICO Ghana Limited. He has also undertook consultancy assignments for companies such as Nestle Ghana Limited, GHACEM, La Palm Hotel, Jospong Group of Companies and Ghana Re-Insurance among many others.
Edward is currently an Executive Director of Targetlink Limited and the 
Managing Consultant for Cypher Consult Limited.
He holds an M.Phil. (Marketing), EMBA (Marketing) and BA Sociology with 
Economics; all from the University of Ghana. He has been a Member of the American Marketing Association since 2004. Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 114 GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Mr. John Kofi Adomakoh
Managing Director
Koﬁ is a seasoned banker with over 25 years’ experience, 15 of which have 
been at Executive Management level. Ko ﬁ
 joins GCB Bank Limited (GCB) from 
African Export-Import Bank headquartered in Cairo where he worked as a 
Director & Global Head, Project and Asset-Based Finance. Prior to that, he held leadership roles at Barclays Bank Ghana Limited (now ABSA Bank Ghana Limited), The Trust Bank Ghana Limited and Ecobank Ghana Limited.
Ko
ﬁ 
has worth of experience in International, Corporate and Institutional and 
Transaction Banking, Development Finance, Project and Export Finance, with 
a track record in delivering business transformation and high-quality outcomes.
He led and structured several transactions worth over USD10 billion across the 
African continent (both public and private sector) in different industry including manufacturing, health, telecom, energy (including oil and gas), transport (ports, airports, rails and roads), mining and agriculture among others.
Ko
ﬁ
 is an inspiring and energetic leader who is widely known for his 
collaborative leadership style and for building high performance teams. Ko
ﬁ
 holds an Executive Masters’ Degree in Business Administration and a 
Bachelor of Science in Agriculture from the University of Ghana, Legon.
Mr. Socrates Afram
Deputy Managing Director, Finance
Socrates is a ﬁn ance professional with 20 years’ experience in the Financial 
Services Sector. He has a breadth of experience across strategy; business per -
formance and reporting ( ﬁn
ancial, regulatory and statutory); debt and capital 
raising; business combination; investment and risk management. 
Other positions previously held include:•
 F
inance Director of Fidelity Bank Limited.
•
 H
ead of Research and Head of Business Performance & Financial Control, 
Fidelity Bank Ltd.•
 H
e worked with UBA (Ghana) as Senior Analyst deputizing for the Financial 
Controller. •
 H
e also worked with Export Finance Company Limited as Head of Finance 
& Administration and General Leasing & Finance Company Limited as Analyst 
for lease credit applications. 
Socrates is a fellow of the Association of Chartered Certi
ﬁe
d Accountants 
(ACCA), He holds a Master of Business Administration (Finance) degree from 
the University of Ghana Business School and a Bachelor of Commerce degree from the University of Cape Coast. He is an alumnus of the Wharton Executive Education, University of Pennsylvania, USA.
.Executive Committee (EXCO)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 115 GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey
Deputy Managing Director- Operations
Emmanuel is a seasoned Banker who brings on board over 20 years’ 
multinational experience, working for listed companies in corporate and retail banking, asset management, securities, brokerage services, pensions, insurance and micro-
ﬁn
ance with operations in over 30 African countries. 
He started his career with KPMG and has since held other positions including Chief Financial Officer – WAMZ at Ecobank Ghana; Group Head, Finance at Ecobank Transnational Incorporated (Togo), Group Chief Operating Officer, Letshego Holdings Limited (Botswana) and Executive Business Manager to the Group CEO - Alexander Forbes Group Holdings (South Africa). Emmanuel also held several roles with Standard Bank of South Africa Group in South Africa and Ghana.
Mr. Lamptey holds a Bachelor of Commerce degree from University of Cape 
Coast, Ghana and is a fellow of Association of Chartered Certi
ﬁe
d Accountants 
(ACCA), United Kingdom.
Mr. John Arthur
Ag. Chief Information Officer
John Arthur has been the Acting Head, Systems & Information Technology 
Department of the Bank since 2020. He has more than twenty- ﬁv
e years of 
experience as an Information Technology and Project Management Profes -
sional. 
Prior to his current role, he served the Bank in various capacities at Systems & 
Information Technology Division, Inspection & Audit Division, Human Re -
sources Division, and the Project Management Office. 
He has chalked repeated successes leading to some of the Bank’s key transfor -
mational initiatives in IT Operations.  He has extensive experience managing 
cross-functional teams in the design, integration, and implementation of cut -
ting-edge technology solutions. 
He has a PGC in Business Administration from the University of Leicester and 
a Bachelor of Science degree in Computer Science and Statistics from the Uni -
versity of Ghana.  He is a certi
ﬁe
d ISO-27001 Lead Implementer.Executive Committee (EXCO)  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 116 GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Mr. Samuel Acquah
Chief Risk Officer
Samuel is a Risk Management professional with over twenty- ﬁv
e years’ 
experience in Risk Management in the Financial Services and Oil Sector. 
He is a Corporate Advisor on Risk Management and has depth of experience in Business Performance and Project Management and Investment. 
He has occupied key positions in prestigious institutions like: •
 E
cobank Transnational Incorporated (ETI, Togo), 
•
 S
tandard Chartered Bank (Singapore and Dubai), 
•
 B
urlington Resources – Oil & Gas, United Kingdom, 
•
 W
estern Atlas – Oil & Gas, United Kingdom.
Mr. Acquah holds a MSc. Geoscience Data (Geo Statistics) from the 
Kingston University, United Kingdom, BSc. Geology from the University of Ghana and NVQ3 in Programming Methods from Direct Computing, United Kingdom.
Mr. Anthony Kofi Asare
Treasurer
Koﬁ
 is a quali ﬁe
d Lawyer from the Ghana Law School, Accra, and he has 
MBA in Finance from the University of Ghana Business School and a 
Bachelor of Arts in Economics from the University of Ghana, Legon.
He is a Member of the Ghana Bar Association, and also ACI Certi ﬁe
d in 
both Dealing and Operations.Ko
ﬁ
 joined GCB in November, 1991 at the Planning and Research Division 
of the Bank and rose to become the Head of the Division. He has held 
various positions including the Chief Dealer of the Bank. In October, 1999 he was transferred to the Treasury Department and rose to become the Head of Treasury Department in August, 2008 to present.Executive Committee (EXCO)  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 117 GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Mr. Osman Abudulai 
Head Compliance
Mr. Osman Abudulai joined the Bank in the year 1980. He had held 
various positions which includes; Investment Analyst, Operations Manager, Branch Manager and Head of the Compliance Department. He is a Chartered Banker with ACIB Certi
ﬁc
ation, ACCA Part II holder, 
Certi ﬁe
d Compliance Specialist and a Member of the Certi ﬁe
d 
Compliance Professionals in Africa. Mr. Osman holds a Post Graduate Certi
ﬁc
ate in AML/Financial Crime from the Winsconsin International 
University, Accra, an MBA – Finance option, B.A in Management and Sociology from the University of Ghana, Legon and a Diploma in Principles of Management from the College of Professional Management, London.
Ms. Jessie Jacintho 
General Counsel
Jessie Jacintho was appointed General Counsel on 15th February 2016 
and is responsible for leading the legal function of the Bank. Jessie has an Executive Masters Degree in Business Administration, Human Resource Option from the University of Ghana Business School and has close to 25 years’ experience as a legal practitioner. Jessie has over twenty years’ experience as an in-house counsel having worked with Barclays Bank of Ghana now Absa Bank Ghana for fourteen years, sixteen months with The First Group Limited an investment and management company as its General Counsel and Corporate Affairs Director and during the same period double hatted as the acting Legal Director of Universal Merchant Bank an investee company of The First Group. The remaining period of her in-house counsel role is her current role in GCB. Prior to starting her career as an in-house counsel she worked as a private legal practitioner with the law 
ﬁr
m Naoferg 
Chambers.Executive Committee (EXCO)  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 118 GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Mr. Ishaque Kojo Essel Jnr. 
Head, Human Resources
Kojo is currently the Head, Human Resources Department of GCB Bank 
Limited. He started his banking career as a Management Trainee on 1st April, 1993.
Prior to his appointment, Mr. Essel was the Registrar of GCB Registrars. He 
had worked in responsible positions in the area of Consumer Banking, Credit/Risk, Human Resources, Treasury (Money Market environment as well as Brokerage) and Registrar Service in the Capital Market environment, among others.
He has Master of Business Administration (MBA) from Henley Business 
School, UK and holds a B.Sc. (Hons) degree in Mathematics/Statistics from the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST). He is also a member of the Institute of Human Resource Management Practitioners (IHRMP).
Mr. Sina Kamagate
Chief Internal Auditor
Sina Joined GCB Bank in 2020 with over 13 years of demonstrable experience 
in signi ﬁc
ant areas in banking. His experiences cut across Finance, Treasury, 
Trade 
ﬁn
ance, External Audit and Assurance Service, Internal Audit, Internal 
Control amongst others. 
His work life started with GCB Bank as an Intern and subsequently as National 
Service Personnel, he moved to International Commercial Bank (now FBN Ghana) and left after two (2) years to Ernst & Young Chartered Accountants where he worked in the 
ﬁn
ancial services team. He left in 2013 to join Fidelity 
Bank and was instrumental in the implementation of a risk based approach for the internal audit function. He left in 2014 to UMB Bank to set up the Internal Control Department which has grown to be a key department in the bank.
In 2018 Sina re-joined Fidelity as he went up the corporate ladder and was 
appointed as the Head of Audit in charge of Head Office until April 2020.
He is a Chartered Accountant (ICA), A Chartered Banker (CIB) and holds 
distinction in ACI (Operations). He also holds Master of Research in Finance and a 
ﬁr
st class Accounting Graduate of University of Ghana Business School.
He is a subject matter expert in Finance of International Trade, IFRS, Treasury Management, Internal Control, Auditing and Risk Management. He is a Faculty Member at the National Banking College in the Risk, Regulation and Banking Operations departments.
He is a lecturer at the Chartered Institute of Bankers on part time basis in 
Finance of International trade. He also lectures in Risk Management, Corporate Governance and Treasury Management.
He is a Council Member (Governing Board) of the Chartered Institute of 
Bankers and chairs the Finance Committee.
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1Executive Committee (EXCO)  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 119
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
 Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1All figures are in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016
Income Statement
Interest income  1,938,908  1,555,646  1,355,151  1,187,853  1,019,655 
Interest expense  (430,210)  (387,194)  (388,048)  (292,542)  (133,848)
Net interest income 1,508,698 1,168,452  967,103  895,311  885,807 
Fee and commission income  329,702  293,127  249,025  207,787  174,585 
Fee and commission expense  (51,722)  (51,622)  (51,429)  (37,491)  (32,726)
Net fee and commission income  277,980  241,505  197,596  170,296  141,859 
Net trading income  166,628  141,745  90,638  41,020  27,349 
Other operating income  14,374  21,167  26,242  20,435  17,842 
Operating income  1,967,680  1,572,869  1,281,579  1,127,062  1,072,857 
Loss on derecognition of renegotiated loans -  -    -    (1,543)  (912)
Net impairment loss on ﬁn ancial assets  (219,647)  (75,521)  (60,011)  (49,904)  (27,160)
Operating expenses  (1,129,641) (924,583)  (776,650)  (756,938)  (588,410)
Operating profit  618,392  572,765  444,918  318,677  456,375 
Share of pro ﬁt o f associates, net of tax  (7,566)  903  5,256  13,306  10,619 
Profit before income tax  610,826  573,668  450,174  331,983  466,994 
Income tax expense  (135,096)  (116,978)  (101,112)  (81,940)  (126,539)
National ﬁs cal stabilization levy  (30,341)  (28,233)  (22,321)  (15,445)  (22,339)
Proﬁt f or the year   445,389  428,457  326,741  234,598  318,116 
Other Comprehensive Income:
Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss
Remeasurements on net de ﬁn ed bene ﬁt  liability/asset  14,192  (16,528)  26,257  (19,898)  (13,689)
Fair value of equity instruments  (4,113)  (27,944)  -    -    -   
income tax relating to items that will not be reclassi ﬁe d  3,977  5,288  (6,564)  4,975  3,422 
Total items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss  14,056  (39,184)  19,693  (14,923)  (10,267)
Items that may be reclassified to profit or loss
Exchange differences on translating foreign operations  (1,211)  18,524  (3,903)  -    -   
Fair value changes on ﬁn ancial assets at fair value
through other comprehensive income  -    -    (14,792)  -    -   
Share of comprehensive income of associates 401  2,321  (2,050)  2,483  2,315 
Income tax relating to items that may be reclassi ﬁe d  -    -    4,010  (195)  946 
Fair value changes on available for sale ﬁn ancial assets  -    -    -    783  (3,783)
Foreign currency translation difference for foreign operation  -    -    -    32,286  (14,022)
Total items that may be reclassified to profit or loss  (810)  20,845  (16,735)  35,357  (14,544)
Other comprehensive income, net of taxation  13,246  (18,339)  2,958  20,434  (24,811)
Total comprehensive income for the year 458,635 410,118 329,699 255,032 293,305 
Basic and diluted earnings per share (in GHS) 1.68 1.62 1.23  0.89  1.20 
  Five Year Financial Summary
Statement of Comprehensive Income - GroupBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 120
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d
All figures are in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2020 2019 2018 2017 2016
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents  1,567,241  1,572,538  1,953,620  1,022,684  1,179,975 
Non-pledged trading assets  221,339  142,790  80,004  10,079  -   
Derivative ﬁn ancial instruments  -    236  -    -    -   
Investment (other than securities)  18,534  35,439  41,275  6,902  4,347 
Loans and advances to customers  3,612,588  3,587,653  2,799,041  2,099,330  1,412,977 
Advances to banks  200,904  209,614  212,986  224,950  434,152 
Investment securities  8,622,846  6,025,382  4,646,034  4,884,277  2,633,116 
Investment in associates  91,681  100,391  81,482  88,460  46,000 
Deferred tax asset  158,465  95,324  47,872  32,095  15,510 
Current tax asset  25,808  -    1,067  578  4,387 
Intangible assets  191,136  201,820  190,901  152,349  38,987 
Other assets  462,701  280,555  429,396  882,496  114,020 
Property, equipment and right-of-use-assets  280,654  272,342  237,247  222,861  191,062 
Total assets 15,453,897 12,524,084 10,720,925  9,627,061  6,074,533 
Liabilities
Deposits from banks & other ﬁn ancial institutions  615,418  501,911  272,769  81,805  -   
Deposits from customers  11,345,240  9,320,878  8,024,425  6,842,236  4,259,933
Borrowings  772,525  457,578  344,884  959,105  523,281 
Current tax liabilities  -    9,017  -    -    -   
Employee bene ﬁt  obligations  113,322  118,664  97,647  118,625  95,232 
Other liabilities  421,394  335,674  531,456  411,131  136,259 
Total liabilities  13,267,899  10,743,722  9,271,181  8,412,902  5,014,705 
Equity
Stated capital  500,000  500,000  500,000  100,000  100,000 
Retained earnings  1,111,387  828,873  585,167  870,198  759,477 
Statutory reserve  569,971  460,096  354,845  274,062  247,473 
Regulatory credit risk reserve  -    -    -    -    3,412 
Fair value reserve  5,395  1,581  26,048  2,005  (1,066)
Other reserves  (755)  (10,188)  (16,316)  (32,106)  (49,468)
Total shareholders' equity  2,185,998  1,780,362  1,449,744  1,214,159  1,059,828 
Total liabilities and  shareholders' equity 15,453,897 12,524,084 10,720,925  9,627,061  6,074,533 Five Year Financial Summary
Statement of Financial Position - GroupBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 121
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Financial Highlights – Group
Figures in millions of Ghana Cedis
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 122 GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Chairman’s Statement
Introduction
It is my pleasure and privilege to welcome you all to the GCB 
Bank Limited Annual General Meeting and present to you, on 
behalf of the Board our report for the 2020 ﬁn ancial year. 
The 2020 Financial Year was a very challenging and difficult one particularly because of the economic, social and business disruptions occasioned by the COVID-19 pandemic globally. 
Your Bank adapted quite well to the challenges by adopting 
proactive solutions to mitigate the impact of the pandemic. As a result, we were able to make progress towards our primary goal of providing convenient and accessible products and services to customers and delivering strong returns to our shareholders.
Global Economic Environment
I would like to highlight some of the key global events that 
shaped the year under review. 
The pandemic brought with it unprecedented challenges and 
uncertainties to the business community and individuals. It left millions unemployed and resulted in volatility in stock market and oil prices` . Emerging markets and developing economies faced numerous economic headwinds as they struggled with loss of tourism, dwindling remittances, subdued capital flows, 
and tight ﬁn ancial conditions amid rising debt levels.
Governments and central banks around the world responded by implementing stimulus packages, regulatory reliefs and other interventions to cushion individuals and businesses from the impact of the pandemic. Despite these measures economic activity slowed down and global growth dropped to -3.3 percent in 2020 from 2.8 percent in 2019. 
The Ghanaian Economic & Operating Environment
The developments in the global economy had a knock-on effect 
on the Ghanaian economy. Ghana’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate for 2020 dropped to 0.4% from 6.5% in 2019. This was mainly due to necessary interventions implemented to limit the spread of the disease. I am referring here to the lockdowns, border closures and supply chain disruptions which negatively impacted import trade, tourism and other economic activities including credit to the private sector.
Headline inflation trended upwards from 7.9 percent in December 
2019 to 10.4 percent in December 2020. Interest rates on the money market broadly showed downward trends across the yield curve. The 91-day Treasury bill rate declined to 14.1 percent in December 2020 from 14.7 percent in 2019, and the 182-day Treasury bill rate fell to 14.1 percent in 2020 from 15.2 percent in 2019. The weighted average interbank rate declined to 13.6 percent from 15.2 percent, reflecting the reduction in the monetary policy rate to 14.5% in March 2020, and improved liquidity conditions in the market. Similarly, average lending rate of banks declined to 21.1 percent in December 2020 from 23.6 percent recorded in the corresponding period of 2019.
The Ghana cedi depreciated by 3.9 percent against the US dollar 
in 2020, compared with 12.9 percent depreciation in 2019. The Ghana cedi also depreciated by 7.1 percent against the Pound and 12.1 percent against the Euro, compared with 15.7 percent and 11.2 percent over the same comparative period in 2019. The relative stability of the cedi in 2020 was largely due to strong foreign exchange reserve position and forward sales of foreign exchange by the Bank of Ghana. 
Banking Industry Performance Highlights - 2020
Banking sector performance remained strong throughout 2020, 
with robust growth in total assets, deposits and investments. Overall, the impact of COVID-19 on the industry’s performance 
was moderate as banks remained liquid, pro ﬁt able and well-
capitalized. Total assets increased by 15.8 percent to GHS 149.30 billion and net customer loans grew 5.8 percent to GHS 47.80 billion. Total deposits also increased by 24.4 percent to GHS 103.80 billion. Solvency and liquidity indicators remained strong. The industry’s capital adequacy ratio remained healthy at 19.8 percent as at the end of December 2020, well above the regulatory minimum threshold. Net interest income grew by 20.9 percent to GHS11.20 billion compared to 24.9 percent a year ago. Net fees and commissions grew by 5.0 percent to GHS 2.30 billion, lower than the growth of 16.5 percent recorded in the prior year, reflecting the dip in growth of credits and other 
trade ﬁn ance-related businesses. Operating income rose by 17.9 
percent whilst operating expenses rose by 8.2 percent, albeit Mr. Jude Kofi Arthur
Board ChairmanI am confident that we have the 
capacity to dominate the banking sector in Ghana by leveraging our strong balance sheet, branch network, large and growing client base, improving internal collaboration and our rich heritage as an indigenous 
Ghanaian Bank.
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 123 GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Chairman’s Statement  (cont’d)
lower than the respective growth rates of 21.1 percent and 12.1 
percent in 2019. Loan loss provisions grew by 28.0 percent, higher than the 23.6 percent a year ago reflecting elevated credit risks in 2020. Non-Performing Loans (NPL) ratio increased from 14.3 percent in December 2019 to 14.8 percent in December 
2020. Industry Pro ﬁt b efore Tax for the year grew by 27.2% to 
GHS 6.10 billion but was lower than the prior year’s growth of 34.7 percent. 
Our 2020 Financial Performance Highlights
Despite the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, your Bank 
performed reasonably well for the year under review.  The 
improvement in ﬁn ancial results was supported by balance sheet 
growth and income diversi ﬁc ation. 
We recorded growth in Pro ﬁt b efore Tax of GHS 610.83 million 
from GHS 573.67 million in 2019, up 6.5 percent attributable to revenue growth. Net interest income was up 
29.1 percent, from GHS 1,168.45 million to GHS 1,508.70 million. 
Net trading income grew by 17.6 percent to GHS 166.63 million from GHS 141.75 million whilst net fees and commission income also increased by 15.1 percent to GHS 277.98 million from GHS 241.51 million. Operating income increased from GHS 1,572.87 million to GHS 1,967.68 million, reflecting an increase of 25.1 percent over the prior year.  Operating expenses went up by 22.2 percent from GHS 924.58 million to GHS 1,129.64 million due to Covid-19 related expenditures. The cost income ratio improved to 57.4 percent compared to 59.1 percent in 2019. 
Our total assets recorded a growth of 23.5 percent from GHS 
12.52 billion in 2019 to GHS 15.45 billion in 2020. The growth was funded mainly from a 21.8 percent increase in deposits from GHS 9.82 billion in 2019 to GHS 11.96 billion in 2020. Net customer loans increased 0.3 percent to GHS 3.81 billion in 2020 from GHS 3.80 billion in 2019. The Bank’s equity recorded a growth of 23.0 percent from GHS 1.78 billion in 2019 to GHS 2.19 billion in 2020. The Capital Adequacy Ratio of GCB at the 
end of 2020 was 20.7 percent, signi ﬁc antly above the prudential 
requirement of 11.5 percent. 
The Return on Average Equity was approximately 22 percent and 
earnings per share increased by 3.7 percent from GHS 1.62 to GHS 1.68. 
The pandemic weighed heavily on the performance of stocks 
listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange, with the ﬁn ancial stocks 
being signi ﬁc antly affected. Our share price experienced 
volatility during the year with a high of GHS 5.10 and a low of 
GHS 3.40, reflecting the lowest price in the last 4 years.  Our share price improved to GHS 4.05 at the end of 2020. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, your Bank is strong and well capitalized 
for our business mix and risk pro ﬁl e, and we will continue to 
deliver best in class return on equity, while making the 
appropriate investments in our people and culture to serve our 
clients. These initiatives will be supported by the effective harnessing of current and emerging technologies to our 
competitive advantage.
Regulatory Developments
Ladies and Gentlemen, the last couple of years have been 
marked by signi ﬁc ant changes in the Ghanaian banking sector 
landscape, largely underscored by the central bank’s cleanup 
activities which has led to a stronger and more efficient banking sector. The banking sector has shown resilience to the coronavirus pandemic, thanks to the recent increase in minimum regulatory capital as well as regulatory reliefs and interventions by the Bank of Ghana (BoG). The following were some of the regulatory and policy interventions introduced by BoG during the year:
• Lowering of the Monetary Policy Rate (MPR) by 150 basis 
points to 14.5 percent. 
• The primary reserve requirement for banks was lowered 
from 10 percent to 8 percent to provide additional liquidity to Banks. 
• The Capital Conservation Buffer was reduced from 3.0 percent to 1.5 percent.
• Provision for loans in the Other Loans Especially Mentioned (OLEM) category was reduced from 10 percent to 5 percent.
• Restrictions were imposed on dividend and other capital 
distributions for the ﬁn ancial years 2020 & 2021 to preserve 
liquidity and capital.
• The Bank of Ghana also requested Banks to grant 3-12 
months’ moratorium on principal payments on loans 
granted to customers in the worst pandemic-hit sectors.
Consistent with global trends the Anti-Money Laundering/
Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) Guidelines 
were revised by Bank of Ghana and the Credit Reporting 
Regulations, 2020 (LI. 2394) and Borrowers and Lenders Act, 
2020 were passed into law.
Interventions to Alleviate the Impact of COVID-19 
Pandemic
Ladies and Gentlemen, we demonstrated our commitment to 
our customers and employees during these difficult times by undertaking a number of initiatives. 
The Bank engaged customers of the Bank, identi ﬁe d those in the 
hard hit sectors of the economy and supported them with concessionary rates and moratorium on interest and principal on loan facilities.  As part of this exercise the bank restructured loans totaling GHS 799.92 million to 130 corporate and SME customers. During the year under review the bank invested in Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) and the broader COVID-19 protocols to ensure the health and safety of clients and employees. 
Our Digital Journey
The future of banking and I dare say of all other businesses is 
clear. We all have to adjust to the new normal precipitated by the COVID-19 pandemic and reconstruct our business models by leveraging technology to safely deliver customer expectations. 
It is a matter of record that this Board has right from the onset 
set digitalization as the key to driving shareholder value. Accelerating digital capabilities as a key driver of our future growth and transformation is imperative. The current situation resulting from the pandemic makes it even more critical to readjust and accelerate our digitalization program.
Ladies and Gentlemen, we continued to make progress in our 
transformation strategy. We are on course to create an organization that is resilient, agile and efficient across our digital platforms to make banking easier and more convenient for our cherished customers.
Our flagship mobile money wallet platform - G-Money continues 
to grow and we use the platform to make payments on behalf of 
corporates and individuals. Additionally, we deployed for the 
ﬁr st time - a GCB Mobile App that customers can download Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 124
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1Chairman’s Statement  (cont’d)
freely from either Apple or Google play store. This provided an 
opportunity for our customers to access and perform banking services including funds transfer and bills payment at their convenience. 
As part of the digitalization initiatives we implemented GHQR 
and own and operate an in-house switch service for all the major card Schemes- i.e. MasterCard, Visa, China Union Pay and Ghlink. This has made it possible for GCB Bank to carry out the instant issuance of all debit cards for all the card schemes. 
Managing risk in a constantly changing business environment is 
a key priority for your Bank. We will therefore continue to prioritize investment in enterprise risk management and innovation.
Key Management Changes
In September 2020 our Managing Director Mr. Ray Sowah’s 
tenure of office ended after a successful career with the Bank.  On behalf of the Board, I wish Mr. Ray Sowah success in his future endeavors. He was replaced in November 2020 by Mr. 
John Ko ﬁ  Adomakoh, a banker with a wealth of international and 
local experience.  
Mr. Samuel Amankwah, Deputy Managing Director, Operations 
retired during the year after 20 years of meritorious service to the Bank.  He was replaced by Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey, a seasoned banker. 
The appointment of Mr. John Ko ﬁ A domakoh and Mr. Emmanuel 
Odartey Lamptey have since been approved by the Central Bank in line with the Corporate Governance Directives. We welcome both of them to the GCB fraternity and wish them a successful career in the Bank.
We believe we have the right leadership in place for the 
challenges that lie ahead and will strengthen talent management and leadership development within the Bank to create a leadership pipeline that will be able to support the Banks managerial requirements. 
Our Strategic Focus – The Way Forward
Ladies and Gentlemen, sustaining a competitive edge in 2021 
and beyond requires us to effectively navigate the changing dynamics of the banking industry. We recognize that the intensifying competition and challenging macro-economic environment requires banks to be nimble and innovative to serve their customers more efficiently. 
While your bank has made good progress in many fronts over 
the years we have recently refreshed our bank wide strategy and 
sharpened our focus on three identi ﬁe d pillars. These are 
revenue growth and pro ﬁt ability; operational resilience; talent 
development and an enabling culture. 
Our ambition is to assume a leadership position in the Wholesale 
Banking market in addition to our dominance in the Retail Banking market. 
I am con ﬁd ent that we have the capacity to dominate the banking 
sector in Ghana by leveraging our strong balance sheet, branch network, large and growing client base, improving internal collaboration and our rich heritage as an indigenous Ghanaian Bank.
Corporate Governance
Rigorous and effective corporate governance is essential for the 
long-term success of the Bank. The Board therefore remains committed to ful ﬁl ling its corporate governance obligations and 
responsibilities in the best interest of the Bank and its shareholders by adhering to the Bank of Ghana corporate governance directives and best industry practice. 
We are very passionate about good conduct and instilling a 
culture of ethical behavior in all our employees. We remain focused on values and principles that enable us to exercise good judgement and make the right decisions in the exercise of our mandate. During the year in accordance with Bank of Ghana 
directives, training, certi ﬁc ation and performance evaluation of 
directors were duly carried out. I can con ﬁr m to you our 
shareholders that the Board in the exercise of its mandate has observed all the Bank of Ghana corporate governance directives, 
its own governance protocols as well as all other relevant 
regulations. 
Corporate Social Responsibility  
GCB is committed to being a good corporate citizen in the 
communities that it serves. Our focus is giving back to the society 
in the areas of health, education, sports, ﬁn ancial inclusion and 
the environment. Our focus includes support for other activities that contribute to positive change with meaningful impact in our communities. 
Having operated in Ghana for over 60 years, we are living our 
Bank for Life promise.  During the year, notwithstanding the difficult operating environment, we invested a total of GHS 8.04 million in Corporate Social Responsibility, compared to GHS 10.43 million in 2019.      
DividendYour Bank pursues a prudent dividend policy that ensures a 
reasonable return to shareholders whilst maintaining the growth and appreciation of the share value. Accordingly based on our 
2020 pro ﬁt s, strong capital and liquidity, the Board of Directors 
recommend a dividend payment of GHS 0.25 per share representing a 25 percent increase on 2019.  We have obtained regulatory approval from Bank of Ghana and subject to your approval the dividend payment will be made to all shareholders registered in the books of GCB at the close of business on Friday, May 21, 2021. 
AppreciationLadies and Gentlemen, we have made good progress in spite of 
the challenges that came with Covid-19. On behalf of the Board, 
I would like to express my sincere appreciation to the 
Management and staff of GCB Bank for their commitment and dedication throughout this difficult year, going the extra mile in 2020 to grow the business and ensuring that we deliver value to all our stakeholders. 
To our customers you are the reason why we remain in business, 
we say Thank you for your custom. Respectfully I would like to 
recognize the support of our shareholders and say a big thank you to them for the opportunity to be of service.  
Jude Kofi Arthur.
ChairmanBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 126
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Managing Director’s  
Review of Operations for the 2020 financial year
Mr. John Kofi Adomakoh 
Managing Director
Introduction
Dear shareholders, it is a great pleasure for me to present 
to you the Bank’s operational activities and performance for the year ended 31 December 2020.
The year 2020 was eventful globally due to the novel 
Covid-19 virus. The pandemic negatively impacted economic activities globally and brought about disruption to individuals and businesses despite various interventions by several stakeholders including governments and banking industry regulators in many countries among 
others.  In the face of these challenges and uncertainties, 
your bank delivered solid returns as well as strong operating performance resulting in the improvement in the cost income ratio by 100 basis points to 58%. This achievement reflects the resilience and dedication of our 
Shareholders, Board and Staff and our sustained 
commitment to the banking needs of our customers. 
Our 2020 Financial Performance  Highlights
Despite the challenges caused by the Covid-19 pandemic, 
2020 was a good year for GCB Bank. Our Bank recorded 
growth in Pro ﬁ t before Tax of 6.5% to GHS 610.83 million 
due to broad-based growth in revenue supported by balance sheet growth, higher transaction volumes and acquisition of new clients. Disciplined cost management 
helped achieve a positive jaws ratio of 3% and ROE of 
22% despite continued investment in technology and Covid-19 related expenditures. 
Consumer Bank continued to achieve strong results, 
delivering revenue growth of 22% and pro ﬁ t growth of 10%. Investment in electronic banking solutions and 
digital capabilities, as well as intensi ﬁe d sales and 
marketing, helped us grow transaction volumes, win new 
customers, increase deposits and grow loans.
Treasury continued to bene ﬁt  from close collaboration 
with other business units within the bank, driving revenue growth of 46% year on year. 
2020 was a difficult and challenging year for our Corporate 
Bank and SME businesses signi ﬁc antly due to the impact 
of COVID-19. Corporate Bank reported revenue growth of 
2% attributable to volume growth in deposits and fee 
earning transaction volumes. However, signi ﬁc antly 
higher credit impairment charges on a few clients resulted in the business recording a loss for the year. 
Despite growth in revenue of 29% supported by deposit 
and loan growth, SME business reported a lower pro ﬁ t 
compared with the prior year. Pro ﬁ ts were lower by 34% 
mainly stemming from higher impairment charges.Our capital adequacy ratio remains very healthy and 
strong and at the end of the year stood at 20.7%, well above the regulatory minimum ratio of 11.5%. We have a 
large branch network, great talent and large and loyal 
customers which gives us a solid foundation to continue to deliver superior returns to our shareholders. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to turn our attention to 
a few other key developments achieved during the past year. 
On the digital front, the Bank’s flagship mobile money 
wallet platform - G-Money saw signi ﬁc ant growth in 
Our ambition is simple 
and it is to dominate the 
Retail and Wholesale 
banking segments
in Ghana.  Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 127
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020customer base and payment transaction volumes. Going 
into the future, G-Money will be critical in leading the Bank’s digitisation agenda, providing an expanded 
payment channel and convenient banking services for 
individual and corporate customers.
GCB Capital secured an operating license from the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) for Fund Management and Custody services. The sterling performance of the team culminated in growth in Asset 
Under Management (AUM) to GHS 2.13Bn at the end of 
2020. 
In playing our additional role as a national bank, GCB is 
supporting the government’s efforts on the ﬁn ancial 
sector bailout programme. The Amalgamated Mutual 
Fund Plc (AM Fund) was incorporated in August 2020 under GCB Capital to manage the payout of funds to 
clients of the collapsed fund management companies 
whose licenses were revoked by the SEC. As of the end of the year, a total of GHS536 million payments had been made to 5,800 clients. We also secured a Sub-Co-Arranger mandate for the 2020 Eurobond Issuance which successfully raised USD 3 Billion.
 Further, the Bank is a key stakeholder in the GCB Real 
Estate Investment Trust, which constructed 204 townhouses in Tema for sale to public sector workers under a mortgage scheme.  As part of the scheme, the 
Bank will provide mortgage ﬁn ancing facilities to potential 
purchasers of the housing units.
Finally, to improve the data security and controls within 
our payments and operating environments, the Bank 
achieved a PCI-DSS certi ﬁc ation in 2020 and an 
International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO) 
certiﬁc ation project is scheduled to complete by 2021. A 
Security Operation Centre (SOC) was also set up to provide visibility on the Bank’s network and systems infrastructure to proactively prevent security breaches.
Sharpening our Strategic Focus
With the constantly changing business environment and 
disruptions across many fronts, means to be successful 
enough to generate sustainable pro ﬁ ts and returns, every 
business must ensure its strategy is relevant and its business is well-positioned to proactively meet the needs and expectations of its clients. Several developments 
impacting the banking sector, mainly African Continental 
Free Trade Area (AfCFTA), intensifying competition from both industry and non-industry players including FinTechs have reshaped the competitive landscape requiring the need to refresh our strategy and strengthen our execution. Since my appointment in November last year, the Board, my management team and I have reviewed our existing 
strategy.  
Through wide stakeholder engagements, we have 
refreshed our strategy with a sharpened focus on three 
pillars: revenue growth and pro ﬁt ability; operational 
resilience, and talent and culture. While we have consistently retained our number one position in the Consumer Banking segment, we believe there is a 
signiﬁc ant opportunity to further expand our market 
share and pro ﬁ ts for this segment leveraging digitization 
and the trust customers have always had in our bank. Our strategy recognizes the importance of internal collaboration among various business units and functions, 
with the objective to understand the unique needs of our 
clients and offer the right solutions in a cost-effective and 
capital-efficient manner. We will therefore continue to 
make the relevant investments in technology, digitization and people to grow our market share of the payments 
industry in Ghana. Growing revenue from trade ﬁna nce, 
cash management and remittances will remain a key area of our strategy to drive non-interest revenue. 
Our ambition is simple and it is to dominate the Retail and 
Wholesale banking segments in Ghana. 
Conclusion
I would like to express appreciation to our Board of 
Directors and Shareholders for their support throughout the year.
The continuous patronage of our products and services 
by our loyal customers cannot be overemphasised. Thank you for your business. The Bank will continuously work to 
improve on the experiences as we serve your ﬁn ancial 
needs.
Similarly, I express my gratitude to the management and 
staff of the Bank for their dedication, commitment and hard work resulting in the improvement in our 
performance. As we go into another year with increased 
expectations from our stakeholders, I do not doubt that working together we can exceed the expectations of our customers and other stakeholders and make our Bank the best place to work in Ghana.
John Kofi Adomakoh
Managing DirectorManaging Director’s  Review of Operations (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 128
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Managing Director’s  Review of Operations (cont’d)
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 130
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Report of the Directors
to the members of GCB Bank Limited
The Directors are pleased to submit their report on the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements of GCB Bank 
Limited for the year ended 31 December 2020.
Directors’ Responsibility Statement
The Directors are responsible for the preparation of the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements that give a true 
and fair view of GCB Bank Limited, comprising the statements of ﬁn ancial position at 31 December 2020, statements 
of pro ﬁ t or loss and comprehensive income, statements of changes in equity and statements of cash flows for the 
year ended and notes to the consolidated ﬁn ancial statements, which include a summary of signi ﬁc ant accounting 
policies and other explanatory notes, in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), the 
Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930). In addition, the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the Report of the Directors.
The Directors are also responsible for such internal controls as the Directors determine is necessary to enable the 
preparation of ﬁn ancial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and for 
maintaining adequate accounting records and an effective system of risk management.
The Directors have made an assessment of the ability of the Bank and its subsidiary to continue as going concerns and 
have no reason to believe that the businesses will not be going concerns in the year ahead. 
The Auditor is responsible for reporting on whether the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements give a true and 
fair view in accordance with the applicable ﬁn ancial reporting framework.
Principal Activities
The Bank has a universal banking license and is registered to carry on the business of consumer banking, small and 
medium scale enterprise (SME) banking, corporate banking and treasury activities. It also engages in investment banking activities through its subsidiary. The nature of the Group’s business did not change during the year.
Shareholding Structure
Details of the Bank’s twenty largest shareholders are disclosed in Note 43a of the Annual Report.
The Bank’s shareholding structure at the end of the year was as follows:
Shareholder Percentage Holding
Social Security and National Insurance Trust (SSNIT) 29.89%
The Government of Ghana 21.36%
Institutions and Individuals 48.75%
Total 100.00%
Subsidiary and AssociatesGCB Capital Limited, a company incorporated in Ghana to engage in investment banking activities, is a wholly owned 
subsidiary of the Bank.
The Bank holds 20% interest in Ghana International Bank Plc, a company incorporated in the United Kingdom to 
provide universal banking services.
The Bank holds indirect interest of 20%, 25% and 34% in Ghana Textiles Manufacturing Company, Accra Markets 
Limited and NCR Ghana Limited respectively through its subsidiary.
Ghana Textiles Manufacturing Company is a company engaged in the production and processing of textile as well as 
warehousing.
Accra Markets Limited is a company incorporated in Ghana whose principal business is the management of the 
Kaneshie Market Complex. NCR Ghana Limited is a leading technology and omni-channel solutions company incorporated in Ghana.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 131
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Report of the Directors
to the members of GCB Bank Limited (cont’d)
Details of serving directors’ other engagements at the reporting date are disclosed below:
Directors Qualification Other Engagements and Positions
Mr. Jude Ko ﬁ  
ArthurFellow, The Chartered Institute of Bankers, Ghana
BSc. Administration, University of GhanaGhana International Bank - Non-
Executive Director
Mr. John Ko ﬁ  
AdomakohExecutive MBA, University of Ghana. BSc, Agriculture, University of Ghana, LegonGCB Capital Limited - Non-Executive Director
Mr. Socrates Afram
Fellow, Association of Chartered Certi ﬁe d Accountants-UK; 
MBA Finance, University of Ghana; Bachelor of Commerce, University of Cape Coast.GCB Capital Limited - Non-Executive Director, NCR Ghana Limited - Non-Executive Director
Mr. Emmanuel Odartey 
Lamptey
Fellow, Association of Chartered Certi ﬁe d Accountants-UK
Bachelor of Commerce, University of Cape CoastGCB Capital Limited -Non-Executive 
Director
Mr. Nik 
Amartei ﬁoMBA, Harvard Business School
BA. Economics, Wesleyan University
 
 Dannex Aryton Starwin Pharmaceutical 
Group Limited - Non-Executive Director, 
Omni Media (Citi FM) - Non-Executive 
Director,  African American Inst. (NY) - Non-Executive Director, Ghana Agro Food Company - Non-Executive Director
Mrs. Lydia Gyamera EssahMPhil- Institute of Management & Public Administration (GIMPA); BA English & Literature, University of Ghana, 
Legon Ghana None
Nana Ama Ayensua Saara 
III B. Com, University of Cape Coast
Diploma Business Studies, Takoradi PolytechnicNasaa Company Limited - Executive 
Director, Government Special Initiative 
- Non-Executive Director
Mr. Emmanuel 
Ray AnkrahFellow, Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (UK); Fellow British Society of Commerce; Member 
Institute of Chartered Accountants Ghana; Post Graduate Diploma Strategic Financial Management, Kingston 
UniversityNational Insurance Commission - Non-Executive Director
Mr. Osmani 
Aludiba AyubaMember, Institute of Chartered Accountants Ghana; Member, Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply; 
M.A. Economic Policy Management, University of Ghana 
Bachelor of Commerce, University of Cape Coast; Diploma in Education, University of Cape Coast.Northern Electricity Distribution Company (NEDCO)
Executive DirectorBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 132
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Report of the Directors
to the members of GCB Bank Limited (cont’d)
Directors Qualification Other Engagements and Positions
Mr. Francis 
Arthur CollinsFellow, Ghana Institute of Information Technology; Member, Institute for the Management of Information Systems (UK); 
Member, British Computer Society (UK); Master’s Degree in Information Technology and Business Administration; (MBA-
IT), University of Leicester (UK); Professional Certi ﬁcate in 
Structured Systems Analysis and Design, National Centre for Information Technology, Manchester (UK); Dp. Data 
Processing, University of Science & Technology, Kumasi (GH).None
Alhaji Alhassan 
Yakubu MBA Finance (part 1), University of Ghana, Legon; Certi ﬁcate 
from the Financial Institution Analysis School of the Federal Reserve Bank, Washington DC; B.Sc. Administration, Banking  
& Finance, University of Ghana, LegonNone
Mr. Prince 
Edward 
Amoatia 
YoungeM.Phil. (Marketing) – University of Ghana; EMBA (Marketing) – University of Ghana; BSc. Sociology with Economics- 
University of Ghana; Member, American Marketing 
AssociationTargetlink Limited - Executive Director
Cypher Consult Limited - Executive 
Director
Financial Results
The ﬁn ancial results of the Bank and Group for the year ended are set out in the ﬁn ancial statements, highlights of 
which are as follows:
2020 2019
 Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Proﬁt f or the year (attributable to equity holders) 439,501 445,389  421,003  428,457 
to which is added the balance brought forward on retained earnings of736,878 828,873 
 500,624  585,167 
  1,176,379  1,274,262  921,627  1,013,624 
Out of which is transferred to the statutory reserve fund of (109,875) (109,875) (105,251) (105,251)
Dividend declared and paid of (53,000) (53,000)  (79,500)  (79,500)
 (162,875)  (162,875)  (184,751)  (184,751)
leaving a balance to be carried forward on retained 
earnings of 1,013,504  1,111,387  736,876  828,873 
In accordance with section 34 (1) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930), an 
amount of GHS 109,875,000 (2019: GHS 105,251,000) was transferred to the statutory reserve fund from retained earnings bringing the cumulative balance on the statutory reserve fund at the year-end to GHS 569,971,000 (2019: 
GHS 460,096,000).
Related Party Transactions
The Board ensures that transactions with related parties including internal group transactions are reviewed to assess 
its risk and are subject to appropriate restrictions by requiring that such transactions be conducted on non-preferential terms. 
Information regarding Directors’ interests in ordinary shares of the Bank and remuneration is disclosed in Note 39 & 
43 to the ﬁn ancial statements. Other than service contracts, no Director had a material interest in any contract to 
which any Group company was a party during the year. Related party transactions and balances are also disclosed in 
Note 39 to the ﬁn ancial statements.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 133
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Biographical Information of Directors
No. Name Profession Nationality Born 
1. Mr. Jude Ko ﬁ  Arthur Banker Ghanaian 1955
2. Mr. Ko ﬁ A domakoh Banker Ghanaian 1966
3. Mr. Socrates Afram Banker / Chartered Accountant Ghanaian 1973
4. Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey Banker / Chartered Accountant Ghanaian 1974
5. Mrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah Banker / Management & Banking Consultant Ghanaian 1955
6. Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III Business Executive / Traditional Ruler Ghanaian 1970
7. Mr. Nik Amartei ﬁo Director / Business Executive Ghanaian 1945
8. Mr. Osman Aludiba Ayuba Chartered Accountant Ghanaian 1971
9. Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins Information Technologist Ghanaian 1956
10. Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah Chartered Accountant Ghanaian 1962
11. Alhaji Yakubu Adam Alhassan Banker / Business Executive Ghanaian 1966
12. Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge Marketing Consultant Ghanaian 1964
The Directors are responsible for the long term success of the Group, determining the strategic direction of the Group 
and reviewing operating, ﬁn ancial and risk exposures of the Group. There is a formal schedule of matters reserved for 
the Board of Directors, including approval of the Group’s annual business plan, the Group’s strategy, acquisitions, 
disposals and capital expenditure projects above certain thresholds, all guarantees, treasury policies, the ﬁn ancial 
statements, the Group’s dividend policy, transactions involving the issue or purchase of the Group’s shares, borrowing 
powers, appointments to the Board, alterations to the regulations, legal actions brought by or against the Group and the scope of delegation to Board committees, subsidiary boards and management committees. Responsibility for the 
development of policy and strategy and operational management is delegated to the Executive Directors and a 
management committee, which as at the date of this report includes three (3) executive Directors and eleven (11) senior managers.
Particulars of entries in the Interests Register during the financial year
No Director had any interest in contracts and proposed contracts with the Group during the year under review, hence 
there were no entries recorded in the Interests Register as required by 194(6), 195(1)(a) and 196 of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992).
Internal Control System
The Directors have overall responsibility for the Group’s internal control systems and annually review their effectiveness, 
including a review of ﬁn ancial, operational, compliance and risk management controls. The implementation and 
maintenance of the risk management and internal control systems are the responsibility of the Executive Directors and 
other senior management. The systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and to provide reasonable, but not absolute, assurance against material misstatement or loss. The 
Directors have reviewed the effectiveness of the internal control systems, including controls related to ﬁn ancial, 
operational and reputational risks identi ﬁe d by the Group as at the reporting date and found no signi ﬁc ant failings or 
weaknesses during this review.
Corporate Social Responsibility
Corporate social responsibility activities performed during the year have been disclosed in the note 42 of the ﬁn ancial 
statements.Auditor
The auditor, Deloitte and Touche Ghana, has expressed willingness to continue in office in accordance with Section 
139(5) of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992).Report of the Directors
to the members of GCB Bank Limited (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 134
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Auditor’s fees
Included in the pro ﬁ t for the year is the agreed auditor’s remuneration of GHS 1,610,000 (2019: GHS1,448,000). 
COVID-19 commentary
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a strain of novel coronavirus disease, 
COVID-19, a global pandemic. The breadth and depth of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy 
and ﬁn ancial markets has continued to evolve with disruptive effects in industries in which we operate and beyond, 
while also contributing to increased market volatility and changes to the macroeconomic environment. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has continued to affect our employees, some of our clients and communities, with resultant 
impacts on our operations, ﬁn ancial results and present and future risks to our business. Details of the impact of 
Covid-19 have been outlined below;
Business and operational Impact of COVID- 19
During the year, various aspects of the Bank’s operations were also impacted. Below are the impacted areas of the 
Bank’s business and how the Bank responded to them.
Lock down and social distancing 
Due to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, governments across the world have declared national lockdowns, which 
have resulted in extensive travel restrictions and quarantine measures being implemented. Businesses globally have 
had to limit or suspend their operations and as such, the COVID-19 measures implemented by governments globally 
have severely impacted a wide range of industries, including the ﬁn ancial sector. Due to the global economic downturn, 
a signi ﬁc ant increase in the volatility of the ﬁn ancial and commodities markets worldwide has been noted. 
The Bank has responded to the COVID-19 pandemic by taking several measures designed to protect the health of its employees and to minimize operational disruption and resulting provision of services to our customers, including adopting strict social distancing and cleaning measures in our branches and all other units of the Bank, taking the 
temperature of employees and customers on daily basis as a prerequisite for entering our facilities, and instituting 
work from home protocols amongst other measures.
COVID- 19 debt relief measures provided to customers
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and its resultant impact on the economy, a liquidity crisis was experienced by a large 
number of customers across the Group. In order to assist customers, the Group provided various relief measures to customers. In the retail and commercial segments, these included the following: 
• new facilities being granted, including the COVID-19 SME scheme guaranteed by the Government of Ghana through the National Board for Small Scale Industries;
• restructure of existing exposures with no change in the present value of the estimated future cash flows;  
• restructure of existing exposures with a change in the present value of the estimated future cash flows; and
• For wholesale exposures, bespoke debt relief measures were provided on a client-by-client basis. 
Financial Statements Impact of COVID-19
Included in the operating expense for the reporting period is an amount of GHS 14.4 million directly incurred as a 
result of the effect of COVID-19 pandemic.
The Bank also spent GHS 6.4 million for the period under review as part of its social responsibility to help ﬁg ht against 
the spread of COVID-19.
Significant increase in credit risk (SICR)
The assessment of whether there has been a signi ﬁc ant increase in credit risk of loan assets (exposure) is performed 
through the identi ﬁc ation of signi ﬁc ant changes in credit quality over the entire life of the exposure. Information 
available that is reasonable and supportable on which to assess SICR and to measure Expected credit losses (ECL) 
remains limited in these unprecedented times. Report of the Directors
to the members of GCB Bank Limited (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 135
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020In August 2020, the Bank of Ghana, the regulator, issued the “Guidance Notes for the Application of IFRS 9 ECL 
Impairment Model in response to COVID-19 Pandemic.” For the assessment of signi ﬁc ant increases in credit risk, the 
Bank has drafted a COVID-19 Policy Framework, which seeks to update some aspects of the Bank’s ECL policy to 
account for relief measures introduced by the Banking regulator per the guidance notes. The guidance notes introduced measures in response to the economic impact of COVID-19 such as payment moratoria (voluntary or legislative) and 
other Government measures. The guidance indicates that these targeted measures (contract modi ﬁc ations) to support 
borrowers should not automatically result in exposures moving from a 12-month ECL to a lifetime ECL measurement. Consequently, there has been an addendum to the Group’s ECL policy in the form of a COVID-19 framework policy to account for these measures. 
Central to the Group’s ECL policy update as a result of the pandemic is the determination of which loan assets are not 
signiﬁc antly affected by the current conditions in the long term from those that would be unlikely to restore their credit 
worthiness as a result of the effects of the pandemic. Consequently, assets that are not expected to remain in stage 1 
or those, which despite the relief measures granted by the Bank per the regulator’s mandates, still exhibit signs of distress, are considered as having SICR. 
Future outlook of COVID- 19
The global economy continues to come under the negative effects of COVID-19. Various governments and the world 
at large have not relented on their efforts aimed at getting a lasting solution in the form of cure for COVID-19 infection. There has been some breakthroughs with various vaccines ready and currently being administered in Ghana.
The issue of COVID-19 remains a major concern for the global and local economy and it is inherently impractical to 
accurately predict the full extent and duration of the economic impact of COVID-19 pandemic due to the unprecedented nature. Given these uncertainties, Covid-19 could impact:
• Fair value measurements;
• Ability of borrowers to meet their obligations under loan relationships;
• Forward looking information used in the ECL estimates;
• Modi ﬁc ations of ﬁn ancial assets and liabilities may be more frequent;
• Customer deposits; and
• COVID-19 related expenses 
The pandemic could also adversely affect demand for our services, and the Group’s ability to execute on our set 
strategies and initiatives and adversely affect our consolidated ﬁn ancial performance and consolidated ﬁn ancial 
position. 
We will continue to closely monitor and evaluate the nature and extent of the impact of Covid-19 to our business, 
consolidated ﬁn ancial performance results and consolidated ﬁn ancial position.
Going Concern assessment
The Directors reviewed the Group and Bank’s budgets and flow of funds forecasts and considered the Group and 
Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern in light of current and anticipated economic conditions. These budgets and flow of funds forecasts took the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic into consideration, including projections of the 
impact on the Group’s capital, funding and liquidity requirements, all of which have remained within internal targets 
and above regulatory requirements. 
As part of this assessment, the Directors considered the sufficiency of the Group’s ﬁn ancial resources throughout the 
pandemic. The management of the Group’s ﬁn ancial resources, which it de ﬁne s as capital, funding and liquidity, and 
risk capacity, is a critical enabler of the achievement of the Group’s stated growth and return targets and is driven by the Group’s overall risk appetite. Forecast growth in earnings and balance sheet risk weighted assets (RWA) is based 
on the Group’s macroeconomic outlook and is evaluated against available ﬁn ancial resources, considering the 
requirements of capital providers, regulators and rating agencies. The expected outcomes and constraints are then stress tested, and the Group sets targets through different business cycles and scenarios. Report of the Directors
to the members of GCB Bank Limited (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 136
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020On the basis of this review, and in light of the current ﬁn ancial position and pro ﬁ table trading history, the directors are 
satisﬁe d that the Group has adequate resources to continue in business for the foreseeable future. The going concern 
basis, therefore, continues to apply and has been adopted in the preparation of the annual ﬁn ancial statements.
The Directors confirm that to the best of their knowledge:
• the ﬁn ancial statements, prepared in accordance with applicable laws and the International Financial Reporting 
Standards, give a true and fair view of the Group and Bank’s ﬁn ancial position, performance and cash flows; and
• the state of the Group and Bank’s affairs is satisfactory.
Approval of consolidated and separate financial statements
The consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements set out on pages 52 to 143, which have been prepared on the going 
concern basis, were approved by the Board of Directors on 23 March, 2021 and were signed on its behalf by:
                                     
 
Mr. Jude Kofi Arthur
ChairmanMr. John Kofi Adomakoh
Managing DirectorReport of the Directors
to the members of GCB Bank Limited (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 137
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Corporate Governance Statement
Dear Shareholders,
We are pleased to present our 2020 Corporate Governance Statement. The Bank is committed to the highest standards of corporate governance, having a resilient framework, policies and 
processes that are fundamental to the Bank’s major pillars. This supports the maintenance of strong relationships with 
our stakeholders, the long-term sustainability of our business and assets, and our ability to create long-term value. 
The outbreak of the Coronavirus disease (Covid-19) evolved into a pandemic, with major implications on the world 
population’s health and the economic order of which the banking industry was not spared with its devastating effect. In these challenging times, the Bank exhibited superior leadership and decision-making processes and took crucial actions while considering multiple good governance factors, which translated into superb performance in 2020.
At the heart of our Corporate Governance Framework is our commitment to protect and enhance the interests of our 
shareholders through the highest standards of governance, business behaviour and transparency. 
The Framework ensures Board accountability to shareholders and provides for an appropriate delegation of 
responsibilities to our Managing Director and the Executive Management Team. The Framework also outlines the roles and responsibilities of the Board.
GCB’s Corporate Governance Framework is in accordance with international Corporate Governance principles, laws of 
Ghana such as Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992), the Bank & Specialised Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930), Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive 2018 and Fit and Proper Person Directive 2018, Security and Exchange Commission Corporate Governance Code 2020 and Ghana Stock Exchange Listing Rules and Regulations.
This Statement describes our approach to Corporate Governance and how the Bank use sound governance practices 
and principles to support the Bank’s purpose, vision and values.
The Board (the Governing Body)
The role of the Board is to provide leadership and strategic guidance for the Bank. The Board is the premier decision 
making body of the Bank and provides strategic direction and guidance for our business and represents the interests of our shareholders through the creation of sustainable value. The Board continues to focus on our customers, our people, the communities and environment in which we operate and in doing so enhances long-term shareholder 
returns.
The Board ensures that the Bank’s governance processes align with regulators’ directives and framework. The Board 
align strategies with goals embedded with high level of ethics and integrity, de ﬁn ing roles and responsibilities, and 
managing risk effectively.
Roles and Responsibilities
The role of the Board is to provide leadership to the Bank within the boundaries of risk appetite and a framework of 
prudent and effective controls, which enable risk to be identi ﬁe d, assessed, measured and controlled. The Board sets 
the Bank’s strategic aims and risk appetite to support the strategy, ensuring that the necessary ﬁn ancial and human 
resources are in place for the Bank to meet its objectives.
Changes in Directorship
In 2020, the Managing Director, Mr. Ransford Sowah ended his tenure on 30 September 2020. The DMD Operations, 
Mr. Samuel Amankwah also retired on 1 May 2020. The Bank appreciates the incredible contribution of these two Directors in achieving success for the year 2020.
On 12 November 2020, Mr. John Ko ﬁ  Adomakoh joined the Bank as the Managing Director to replace Mr. Ransford 
Sowah. Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey also joined the Bank in January 2021 as the Deputy Managing Director-Operations.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 138
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Corporate Governance Statement  (cont’d)
Separation of the Chairman and Managing Director Roles
Our Board Chairman, Mr. Jude Ko ﬁ  Arthur is an Independent Non-Executive Director.
The Chairman’s role includes but not limited to the following:
• Responsible for advancing the highest standards of integrity, probity and corporate governance of the Bank, 
particularly at Board level;
• Directing the agenda and conducting all Board meetings to facilitate discussions, challenges and decision-making;
• Acting as a conduit between Management and the Board, and being the key point of communication between the Board and Managing Director.
Our Managing Director, Mr Ko ﬁ  Adomakoh is an Executive Director who heads the Executive Directors, Executive 
Committee (EXCO) and Chairman of GCB Capital Limited. He has delegated duties with authority from, and accountable to the Board of Directors for the development and successful implementation of the Bank’s strategy. As a top executive 
his role is very vital and signi ﬁc ant in strategic decision making, his role among others includes but not limited to the 
following:
• Developing Strategic Objectives for the Bank and achievement of planned results; and
• The day-to-day management of the GCB’s Group operations, subject to the speci ﬁe d delegations of authority 
approved by the Board.
The separation of authority is set out in writing and agreed by the Board in the Corporate Governance Framework. This enhances independent oversight of Executive Management by the Board and helps to ensure that no one individual on the Board has autonomous power, influence or authority.
Board Composition
The Board is made of twelve (12) Directors, including nine (9) Non-Executive Directors out of which 30% are 
Independent Directors in-line with the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive 2018. Both Executive and Non-
Executive Directors have clearly de ﬁn ed roles within our Board structure documented in the Corporate Governance 
Framework.
The Board has a rich blend of skills and knowledge, combined with the extensive experience required to guide our 
business in Governance, Banking and Finance, Accountancy, Law, Information Technology, Marketing, Entrepreneurship and Management. 
Independence of Board of Directors
All Directors’ have no material interests in the Group other than their directorship and bring independent and judgment 
to the Board’s deliberations.
The larger number of Non-Executive Directors on the Board, makes the Board more independent and allows it to 
provide higher level of Corporate Governance to shareholders. It also satis ﬁe s our criteria for independence, which 
aligns with the guidance and recommendation provided in the Corporate Governance Framework.The Board considers the Chairman to be independent. Non Executive Directors are independent as pertains to the 
management of the company. The Board of Directors have con ﬁr med the continuing independence and objective 
judgment of the non Executive Directors.Each Director is expected to disclose any business or other relationship that he or she has directly, or as a partner, 
shareholder or officer of a company or other entity that has an interest in the Bank or a related entity. The Board 
considers information about any such interests or relationships, including any related ﬁn ancial or other details, when 
it assesses the Director’s independence.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 139
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Effectiveness of the Board
The Board is structured to ensure that the Directors provide GCB Bank Limited with the appropriate balance of skills, 
experience and knowledge as well as independence. Given the nature of GCB Bank’s business, practical knowledge of 
banking and ﬁn ancial services is necessary for the success of the Bank, and it is clearly established that the Bank has 
a number of Directors with the right skills and experience mix. The Board also bene ﬁ ts from Directors with experience 
in other ﬁe lds.
Directors’ Performance Evaluation
Every year the performance and effectiveness of the Board and its committees and individual Directors are evaluated. 
The evaluation is conducted by assessing the Board structure and committees, Board Meetings and Procedures; Board Management Relations; Succession Planning and Training. The results of the evaluation is shared with all members of 
the Board. The current evaluation revealed that the Board was working with Management to make sure the overall 
strategic plan is being implemented and is working as they envisioned.
Performance evaluation for 2020 was conducted and it was concluded that the performance of the Board and its 
Board Committees was effective for the year under review.
Overall, it was noted that the Board of Directors and its committees are operating in an effective manner and performing 
satisfactorily, with no major anomaly identi ﬁe d.
Board Development and Annual CertificationThe Board encourages Directors to undertake continuing education and training to develop and maintain the skills and 
knowledge needed to perform their role as Directors effectively. 
The Purple Almond Consulting Limited took the Board through Annual Certi ﬁc ation Programme in 2020, which is 
Mandatory for all Directors to be certi ﬁe d per Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive in 2018.
The Board was trained on: 
• Highlights of Recent Regulatory Policies and Directives;
• The Corporate Governance Directive, 2018 – Key Highlights;
• Analysing Governance Scenarios and Drawing Lessons for Board Effectiveness Brie ﬁn gs on the Company Act 
2019 (Act 992) by EY;
• Highlights of Relevant Sections of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Act 930. Sections; Cyber Security Training by KPMG;
• Financial Reporting and Prudential Guidelines; and
• Interpreting and Analysing the Financial Statements
Induction of Directors
On appointment to the Board, Directors are provided with full, formal and tailored programmes of induction, to enable 
them gain in depth knowledge about the Bank’s business, the risks and challenges ahead, the economic knowledge and the legal and regulatory environment in which the Bank operates. 
Conflict of Interest
The Bank has established appropriate conflict authorization procedures, under which actual or potential conflicts are 
regularly reviewed and appropriate authorizations sought. During the year, all interest of Directors were declared and documented by the Secretariat at the beginning of all meetings.Corporate Governance Statement  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 140
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Board Committees
There are eight (8) Committees that assist the Board in carrying out its responsibilities. In deciding the committee 
memberships, the Board endeavours to make the best use of the range of skills and experience across board and share responsibility. Membership of the Committees is reviewed on an annual basis or as and when the need arises.
To ensure effective oversight leadership, the Board receives the minutes/reports of all Committee meetings at Board 
meeting for rati ﬁc ation and approval.
The Committees’ membership and functions are as follows:
Audit Committee
The Audit Committee is chaired by Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah (an Independent Non-Executive Director) and other 
members include Mr. Osmani Ayuba, Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu and Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge.
The functions of the Committee among others include the following:
• Overseeing the Internal Audit Co-sourcing arrangement;
• Reviewing the expertise, resources and experience of the Bank’s ﬁn ance function;
• Monitoring and reviewing the integrity of the ﬁn ancial statements of the Bank including its monthly, quarterly, 
bi-annual and annual reports, trading statements and any other formal announcement relating to its ﬁn ancial 
performance, and reviewing any signi ﬁc ant ﬁn ancial reporting issues and/or judgments contained therein;
• Recommending the appointment of the External Auditor and to oversee the external audit process;
• Approving Internal Audit plans, monitoring & reviewing the effectiveness of the Bank’s internal controls and 
internal audit function; and
• Recommending the appointment of a Chief Internal Auditor.
Risk and Compliance Committee
The Risk and Compliance Committee is chaired by Mrs. Lydia Essah (an Independent Non-Executive Director). The 
other members are Mr. Nik Amarte ﬁo , Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III and Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge.
The Committee’s role is to assist and advise the Board in the governance and effective management of the Bank’s risks.The Risk functions of the Committee among others include the following:
• Establishing, reviewing, and recommending to the Board, the Bank’s overall Risk Appetite as well as assessing the 
appropriateness of the strategy in the context of the Risk Appetite, taking account of the current and prospective 
macroeconomic and ﬁn ancial environment;
• Reviewing and recommending the Bank’s Risk Management Framework (i.e. policies, processes, models and limits) to manage and mitigate risk within the approved Strategy and Risk Appetite to the Board for approval;
• Monitoring the Bank’s risk exposures through the review of the Bank’s risk pro ﬁl e; and
• Review of management reports, monthly key performance Indicators (KPIs), reports on any material breaches of risk limits, on the nature and extent of risk exposures of the Bank.
The Compliance function among others include the following: 
• Overseeing the compliance function designed to ensure compliance with the applicable laws and regulations, and advise on adherence to non-binding rules and standards; and
• Ensuring compliance of other regulatory and ethical demands in respect of customer relations and anti-money laundering.
Cyber Security and IT Governance Committee
The Cyber Security and IT Governance Committee is chaired by Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins (an Independent Non-
Executive Director). The other members are Mr. Osmani Ayuba, Mrs. Lydia Essah and Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu.Corporate Governance Statement  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 141
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Corporate Governance Statement  (cont’d)
Cyber Security and IT Governance Committee (cont’d)
The functions of the committee among others include the following:
• Creating secure environment within “cyberspace” for the ﬁn ancial service industry and generate adequate trust 
and con ﬁd ence in ICT systems as well as transactions in the cyberspace;
• Creating assurance framework for design of security policies and for promotion of compliance to global security 
standards and best practices by way of cyber and information security assessment;
• Improving the integrity of ICT products and services by establishing infrastructure for testing and validation of security of these products and services;
• Promoting continuous cyber and information security risk assessment; and
• Promoting security awareness.
Human Resource and Remuneration Committee
The Human Resource and Remuneration Committee is chaired by Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III (a Non-Executive 
Director). The other members are Mr. Nik Amartei ﬁo , Francis Arthur-Collins and Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge.
The functions of the Committee among others include the following:
• Establishing employment policies to support approved Human Resource strategy;
• Overseeing the establishment of remuneration policies that promote the achievement of strategic objectives and 
encourage individual performance;
• Considering risk to the Bank, which may arise from remuneration policies and practices that drive organization behaviours;
• Regularly reviewing incentives scheme to ensure continued contribution to shareholders’ value; and
• Develop strategy and policy for Board approval, in matters relating to recruitment, selection, training, motivation, development, reward and retention of staff.
Credit Committee
The Credit Committee is chaired by Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu (a Non-Executive Director). The other members are Mrs. 
Lydia Essah, Mr. Osmani Ayuba and Mr. Francis Arthur Collins.
The functions of the Committee among others include the following:
• Making recommendations for the Board’s approval in respect of credit requests made by customers;
• Reviewing sector, and product/asset class concentration exposure reports in order to manage large credit 
exposures, and escalate any breaches to the Board taking into account the relevant Bank of Ghana publications;
• Reviewing at least annually, limits with respect to concentration risk, and make recommendations to the Board as necessary;
• Reviewing and monitoring the large credit exposure reports received from Management, and ensure that exposures are maintained within Bank of Ghana and Board-approved limits; and
• Determining if additional Management action is required to manage or mitigate the large credit exposures risk, and escalate issues to the Board where it is deemed appropriate to do so.
Nominations & Monitoring Committee
The Nominations & Monitoring Committee is chaired by Mr. Nik Amartei ﬁo ( a Non-Executive Director). The other 
members are Mrs. Lydia Essah, Mr. Ray Ankrah and Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge.
The functions of the Committee among others include the following:
• Regularly reviewing the structure, size and composition of the Board;
• Giving full consideration to succession planning for Directors and other Senior Management;
• Identifying and nominating for the approval of the Board, candidates to ﬁl l Board/Key Management vacancies as 
and when they arise;Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 142
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Corporate Governance Statement  (cont’d)
Nominations & Monitoring Committee (cont’d)
• Evaluating the balance of skills, knowledge, experience and diversity on the Board prior to any appointment to the 
Board;
• Reviewing the results of the evaluation of Board performance;
• Keeping under review the leadership needs of the Bank, Executive and Non-Executive; and
• Evaluating the Chairpersons of the various Committees.
Procurement Committee
The Procurement Committee is chaired by Mr. Osmani Ayuba (an Independent Non-Executive Director). The other 
members are Mr. Nik Amartei ﬁo , Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu and Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III.
The functions of the Committee among others include the following:
• Overseeing the development of GCB Bank’s Procurement Policy;
• Oversight and reviewing of tender process and appropriate probity processes to ensure the ethical procurement 
of goods and services to ensure compliance with the Procurement Policy;
• Ensuring strategic procurement objectives are developed and implemented through a procurement strategy to ensure that major investment decisions are procured strategically to enable prudent and efficient outcomes through market engagement;
• Assessing the adequacy and effectiveness of internal controls and risks as they relate to procurement activities;
• Review and monitor procurement performance assessment and processes to identify improvement opportunities for the future; and
• Reviewing, and approving IT strategic plans, oversee major initiatives and allocate resources.
Digital Payments & G-Money Committee
The Digital Payments & G-Money Committee chaired by Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge (an Independent Non-
Executive Director). The other members are Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins, Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu and Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III.
The functions of the Committee among others include the following:
• Povide direction on matters related to enhancement of products and services in pursuit of delivering on the 
Bank’s digital transformation agenda, which is customer centric.
• Review the executive summary of any voice of the customer (VoC) programme which includes:
• Customer and staff feedback
• Complaint feedback review & performance monitoring
• Customer satisfaction strategy & ongoing performance review
• Regulatory key statistics and performance measures
• Ensures development & delivery of a Customer Promise Value add services.
• Review quarterly reports on customer communication and Customer Support via all channels (email, social media, call, face to face, app, website etc.)
• Review Bank’s Digital Innovation performance via
i. G-Money quarterly performance 
ii. Card Issuance and usage report
iii. Website performance and capabilities
iv. Internet banking and sms messaging quarterly reports
v. Quarterly report on role out and performance of merchant point of sale device
vi. Customer communication platforms to include social media, social listening & automation
vii. Delivery of real time customer complaint settlement.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 143
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Digital Payments and G-Money Committee (cont’d)
• Review of the Bank’s progress towards achieving its budget in customer growth using electronic products and 
channels and recommend changes for improvement, if any. 
• Monitors the status of the Bank’s electronic products and payment by reviewing reports on opportunities and threats relating to technological developments.
The Company Secretary
The Company Secretary provides advice and support to the Board, and is accountable to the Board, through the 
Chairman, for all matters relating to the proper functioning of the Board and its Committees. The Company Secretary 
is responsible for advising the Board on governance matters and ensuring compliance with Board and Board Committee framework, terms of reference and procedures.
The Company Secretary was appointed by the Board.The Company Secretary performs the following duties among others:
a. Serves as an interface between the Board and Management and supports the Board chair in ensuring the 
smooth functioning of the Board ;
b. Ensures that Board procedures are followed and reviewed regularly;
c. Ensures that the applicable rules and regulations for the conduct of the affairs of the Board are complied with;
d. Provides the Board as a whole and individual Directors with detailed guidance as to how their responsibilities should be properly discharged in the best interest of the Bank and on good governance;
e. Keeps abreast of, and inform the Board of current corporate governance thinking and practice;
f. Assists the Nominations & Monitoring Committee with the induction and continuous development of Directors;
g. In charge of the Secretariat that maintains the following statutory records in accordance with legal requirement from the Companies Act 2019 (Act 992);
 0Interest Register
 0Register of Holdings of Directors – Shares and debentures
 0Register of Directors and Secretary
 0Related Party Transaction Register
Annual Work Plan
The Board of Directors follow an Annual Work Plan that covers all the necessary areas of its work during the year. The 
Annual Work Plan provides a list of scheduled meetings that help the Board to shift the balance of its time towards matters that are important. It forces the Board to be realistic and prioritize its available time to properly consider key 
decisions and other matters of strategic signi ﬁc ance.
Code of Ethics for the Board and Company Employees
Code of Ethics for the Board has been captured in the Board Corporate Governance Framework which is reviewed 
annually in addition to Code of Ethics Policy for Directors under review for adoption.
The Code of Ethics for Board and employees describe the standards of conduct expected of the Board, Management 
and staff.
The Principles making up the Code are:
• acting with honesty, integrity, and due skill, care and diligence;
• complying with laws and with our policies;
• respecting con ﬁde ntiality and do not misuse information;
• placing importance on our professionalism;
• working as a team; and
• managing conflicts of interest responsibly.Corporate Governance Statement  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 144
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Corporate Governance Statement  (cont’d)
Code of Ethics for the Board and Company Employees (cont’d)
The Code’s guiding principles help the Bank to make the right decisions, ensuring that the reputation of the Bank is 
upheld. 
As Directors and employees of the Bank, we are also committed to creating greater accountability, transparency and 
trust with our customers and the broader community. With that in mind, the principles within our Code also reflect the 
community’s expectations of us.
Board Meetings and Attendance
The Board met on a regular basis in 2020 in spite of the Covid-19 pandemic. The Board Annual Work Plan entails 
scheduled/unscheduled meetings, Strategy Session and Board Retreat. The Board had sixteen (16) meetings in 2020. Directors were involved in Strategy Dialogues throughout the year in pursuance of the Bank’s overall performance.
The Board Committees have delegated authority to meet from time to time to undertake speci ﬁc e xtra duties on 
behalf of the Board.
Below is the table of attendance for Board and Committee Meetings in the year 2020.
Name 
of DirectorBoard 
MeetingsHR & Remu -
nerationNomina -
tions & 
Moni -
toringRisk & 
Com -
pliance Cyber Security 
& IT 
Govern -
anceCredit Procure -
mentAudit Digital Payments 
& G-Money
Jude Arthur     16/16 - -
-  - - - - -
Mr. Anselm Ray 
Sowah12/12 - - -  - - - -  -
Mr. John K. Adomakoh3/3 - -
-  - - - -  -
Mr. Socrates Afram 
              13/16 - - -  - - - -  -
Mr. Samuel Amankwah
  5/5 - - -  - - - -  -
Mr. Nik  
Amartei ﬁo16/16 1/1 3/3 2/2  -  - 1/1  -  -
Mr. Ray Ankrah                               10/16   1/1 0/1  -    - 4/4  -
Mr. Francis 
Arthur-Collins 16/16 1/1  - 1/1 1/1 3/3  -  - 1/1
Mr. Osmani 
Aludiba Ayuba12/16  -  -  - 1/1 3/3 1/1 4/4  -
Mrs. Lydia Essah       16/16  - 3/3 3/3 1/1 3/3  -  -  -
Nana Ama  Ayensua Saara III  15/16 1/1 1/2 2/2  -
  1/1  - 1/1
Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu15/16  -  - 1/1 1/1 3/3 1/1 4/4 1/1
E.P. Amoatia Younge15/16 0/1 3/3 0/2
 -  -  - 2/4 1/1Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 145
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Corporate Governance Statement  (cont’d)
Directors’ Remuneration
Determining the remuneration of the Directors is subject to shareholders approval. The Board Chairman was paid a net 
monthly fee of GHS 15,556 and a sitting allowance of GHS 5,000 per Board meeting. The other Non-Executive Directors were paid a monthly fee of GHS 9,242 and a sitting allowance of GHS 3,750 per meeting.
The total remuneration for Non-Executive Directors amounted to GHS 3,619,185 out of the approved amount of GHS 
3,850,000 at the 2019 Annual General Meeting. 
Disclosures on Conflicts of interests and Related Party transactions
The Corporate Governance Framework is designed to ensure that actual, perceived or potential conflicts of interests 
are identi ﬁe d, managed or prevented. The framework outlines the organizational and administrative arrangements 
that have been put in place to support the identi ﬁc ation and management of conflicts of interest which guarantee that 
Directors act at all times in the best interests of the Bank.Directors disclose interests, if any, at the beginning of every Board meeting and also submit a written declaration. 
Details of all Directors’ conflicts of interest are recorded in an Interests and Related Party Transaction Registers which are maintained by the Secretariat and reviewed annually by the Board. This is in compliance with the Bank of Ghana 
Corporate Governance Directive and Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992). No Director had any interest in contracts or 
proposed contracts with the Group during the year under review.
External Directorship and Other Engagements
The Directors of GCB Bank Limited are very experienced, and knowledgeable leaders who have other responsibilities 
and serve on other Boards. To ensure that Directors give greater time commitment to their oversight function in the 
Bank, no director holds more than ﬁv e (5) directorship positions at a time in both ﬁn ancial and non- ﬁn ancial institutions 
in compliance with Section 45 of the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive.
Internal Controls System
The Bank’s internal controls framework covers ﬁn ancial, operational, compliance, legal and information technology 
controls, as well as risk management policies and systems.
The Board, supported by the Audit Committee and the Risk and Cyber Security Committee, oversees the Bank’s system 
of internal controls and risk management. The Bank has three lines of defence when it comes to risk taking where each line of defence has a clear responsibility.
Our business units are our ﬁr st line of defence for risk. This includes identi ﬁc ation and management of risks inherent 
in their businesses and ensuring that we remain within approved boundaries of our risk appetite and policies.
Corporate oversight and control functions such as risk, compliance and parts of technology and ﬁn ance form the 
second line of defense. They are responsible for design and maintenance of the internal control frameworks covering 
ﬁn ancial, operational, compliance and information technology. 
Internal Audit forms the third line of defence. It provides an independent assessment and assurance on the reliability, adequacy and effectiveness of our system of internal controls, risk management procedures, governance framework and processes.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 146
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Report on the Audit of the Consolidated and Separate Financial Statements
Opinion
We have audited the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements of GCB Bank Limited and its subsidiary (the Group 
and Bank), set out on pages 52 to 143, which comprise the consolidated and separate statements of ﬁn ancial position 
as at 31 December 2020, and the consolidated and separate statements of pro ﬁ t or loss and other comprehensive 
income, consolidated and separate statements of changes in equity and consolidated and separate statements of cash 
flows for the year then ended, the notes to the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements, including a summary 
of signi ﬁc ant accounting policies and other explanatory disclosures. 
In our opinion, the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements give a true and fair view of the consolidated and 
separate ﬁn ancial position of GCB Bank Limited as at 31 December 2020, and its consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial 
performance and consolidated and separate cash flows for the year then ended in accordance with International 
Financial Reporting Standards, the requirements of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking-Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).
Basis for opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISAs). Our responsibilities under those 
standards are further described in the Auditors’ Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of 
our report. We are independent of the Group and Bank in accordance with the requirements of the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants’ (IESBA), International Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants (including International Independence Standards) (IESBA code) and other independence requirements applicable to performing 
audits of ﬁn ancial statements in Ghana. We have ful ﬁl led our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with the IESBA 
Code and other ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of ﬁn ancial statements in Ghana. 
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Key audit matters
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgement, were of most signi ﬁc ance in our audit of the 
consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements of the current period. These matters were addressed in the context of 
our audit of the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements as a whole, and in forming our opinion thereon, and 
we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters. Independent Auditor’s Report
To the shareholders of GCB Bank LimitedBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 147
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Key Audit Matter
IFRS 9 Impairment Response
As at December 31, 2020, the Group’s loan and 
advances portfolio was GHS 4.27 billion ( (2019: GHS 4.04 billion) with an associated impairment allowance for expected credit losses (“ECL” or “loss allowance”) of 
GHS 597 million (2019: GHS 374 million). 
As described in Note 4.10, ECL represents a complex 
accounting estimate, which is based on management’s evaluation of probable loan losses expected to be 
incurred over the life of the loan. 
Expected credit losses  was considered to be a key audit 
matter due to the level of signi ﬁcant judgement applied  
by management in determining ECL and the increased 
uncertainty related to the impact of COVID-19 pandemic 
and resultant stress on the global and local economy. 
Corporate and SME loans are an individually signi ﬁc ant 
component of the loans and advances balance and the 
impairment allowance. The determination of related loss 
allowance is judgmental in nature. The areas of 
signi ﬁcant management judgement within the ECL 
measurement process include:
• Probability of Default (PD) — This is an estimate of 
the likelihood of default over a given time horizon. 
Management’s judgement considers historical 
default rates to predict the probability of default at future points-in-time incorporating forward looking economic information and qualitative information 
speci ﬁc to portfolio segments. 
• The assessment of whether an exposure has met 
prede ﬁn ed default criteria as at the reporting date 
(i.e. a trigger event that has caused a deterioration in credit risk and resulted in migration of the loan 
from Stage 2 to Stage 3), taking the impact of 
COVID-19 into account.We performed the following procedures on the ECL for Corporate and Small & Medium-sized Entities (SME) loans and advances with the assistance of our credit specialists, 
taking the impact of COVID-19 into account:
• Updated our understanding of management’s processes 
around the measurement of the ECL including 
management’s modelling methodology, incorporation of 
assumptions and input data.
• Updated our understanding of management’s policies and procedures around the reliability of qualitative and 
quantitative information as well as the calibration of the 
ECL model and ECL output. 
• Assessed the design and implementation of the relevant 
ﬁn ancial reporting controls as well as the general and 
application computer controls relating to input data and delinquency (days past due), early alert monitoring 
system, PDs and Staging. 
• Assessed conformity of management’s ECL accounting 
policy in the context of IFRS 9 and central bank (Bank of 
Ghana) regulatory directives including current guidance 
relating to COVID-19.
• Assessed the appropriateness of the ECL methodology, 
including any re ﬁne ments against actual experience and 
industry practice.
• Assessed the quality of the data used in the ECL model for completeness and accuracy through data analytics. 
• Using an audit sample, agreed the input data (days past due, credit rating, delinquency) to underlying audit 
evidence including loan systems data, loan and legal 
officers and loan documentation. 
• For a sample of loans identi ﬁe d by management as 
having no indicators of signi ﬁcant increases in credit risk 
(SICR) and/or default criteria, we determined if this was reasonable by forming an independent view based on 
both internally and publicly available borrower-speci ﬁc 
and respective industry and segment information on whether SICR or default indicators were present. 
• Evaluated the impact of COVID-19 on a sample of loans and advances and respective borrowers to determine the 
appropriateness of management’s assessment of the 
severity of the impact of COVID-19 and whether conclusions were consistent with current regulatory directives. Independent Auditor’s Report
To the shareholders of GCB Bank Limited (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 148
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Key Audit Matter 
IFRS 9 Impairment Response
• Benchmarked management’s PD rates against Deloitte 
credit specialist’s industry PD rates and Bank of Ghana 
regulatory published credit loss rates to evaluate whether 
management’s PD rates were within an acceptable range. 
• Performed sensitivity analysis using data analytics on PD rates used and Staging in the ECL model. 
• For those highly sensitive PDs, our internal credit specialists recalculated the PDs to evaluate management’s 
process and conclusions for determining the PDs. 
• Challenged management on conclusions reached relating 
to the presence or otherwise of SICR or default criteria as 
well as the application of COVID-19 regulatory directives 
in determining the ECL amount and the appropriateness of the PDs used.
• Validated that the Exposure at Default amounts used in the ECL complied with the requirements of IFRS 9. 
• Performed a recalculation of the ECL estimate together with our credit specialists to validate management’s 
calibration and appropriate inclusion of assumptions and 
input data (loss given default rates and effective interest rates).  
Based on the procedures described above, we did not identify any material misstatements relating to the ECL 
measurement on Corporate and SME advances.
Other Information
The directors are responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the Report of the Directors, 
the Statement of Directors’ Responsibilities, the Corporate Governance Statement, which we obtained prior to the date of this report, and the Annual Report, the Chairman’s Statement and Managing Director’s Review which was made 
available to us after that date. The other information does not include the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements 
and our auditor’s report thereon.
Our opinion on the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements does not cover the other information and we do 
not and will not express an audit opinion or any form of assurance conclusion thereon. 
In connection with our audit of the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements, our responsibility is to read the 
other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the 
consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to be 
materially misstated. If, based on the work we have performed on the other information obtained prior to the date of this auditor’s report, we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in this regard.Independent Auditor’s Report
To the shareholders of GCB Bank Limited (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 149
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Responsibilities of the Directors for the Consolidated and Separate Financial Statements
The directors are responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial 
statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards, the requirements of the Companies Act, 
2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking-Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) and for such internal 
control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial 
statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. 
In preparing the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements, the directors are responsible for assessing the Group’s 
and the Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group and/or the Bank or to cease operations, or have no realistic alternative but to do so. 
Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Consolidated and Separate Financial Statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements 
as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that 
includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud 
or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence 
the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements. 
As part of an audit in accordance with ISAs, we exercise professional judgement and maintain professional scepticism 
throughout the audit. We also: 
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements, 
whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, 
forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. 
• Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are 
appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Group’s and the Bank’s internal control. 
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by the directors. 
• Conclude on the appropriateness of the directors’ use of the going concern basis of accounting and based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast 
signiﬁc ant doubt on the Group’s and the Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern. If we conclude that a 
material uncertainty exists, we are required to draw attention in our auditor’s report to the related disclosures in 
the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify our opinion. 
Our conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of our auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Group and the Bank to cease to continue as a going concern. 
• Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements, 
including the disclosures, and whether the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements represent the 
underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation. 
• Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the ﬁn ancial information of the entities or business 
activities within the Group to express an opinion on the consolidated ﬁn ancial statements. We are responsible for 
the direction, supervision and performance of the group audit. We remain solely responsible for our audit opinion.
We communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing 
of the audit and signi ﬁc ant audit ﬁnd ings, including any signi ﬁc ant de ﬁc iencies in internal control that we identify 
during our audit. Independent Auditor’s Report
To the shareholders of GCB Bank Limited (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 150
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Consolidated and Separate Financial Statements (cont’d)
We also provide those charged with governance with a statement that we have complied with relevant ethical 
requirements regarding independence, and to communicate with them all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on our independence, and where applicable, actions taken to eliminate threats or 
safeguards applied. 
From the matters communicated with those charged with governance, we determine those matters that were of most 
signiﬁc ance in the audit of the consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements of the current year and are therefore the 
key audit matters. We describe these matters in our auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure 
about the matter or when, in extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a matter should not be communicated in our report because the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public 
interest bene ﬁ ts of such communication. 
Report on Other Legal and Regulatory Requirements
In accordance with the Seventh Schedule of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) we expressly state that:
1. We have obtained the information and explanations, which to the best of our knowledge and belief were 
necessary for the purpose of the audit.
2. In our opinion:
• proper books of accounts have been kept by the Group and Bank, so far as appears from our examination of those books.
• the information and explanations given to us, were in the manner required by the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and give a true and fair view of the:
a. statements of ﬁn ancial position of the Group and Bank at the end of the ﬁn ancial year, and 
b. statements of pro ﬁt  or loss and other comprehensive income for the ﬁn ancial year.
• the group accounts have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992), 
to give a true and fair view of the state of affairs, and the pro ﬁ t or loss of the Bank and its subsidiary.
3. The Group and Bank’s statements of ﬁn ancial position and statement of pro ﬁt  or loss and other comprehensive 
income are in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
4. The Group and Bank’s accounts has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 
992), to give a true and fair view of the state of affairs, and the pro ﬁ t or loss of the Bank and its subsidiary.
5. We are independent of the Group and the Bank, pursuant to Section 143 of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992).Independent Auditor’s Report
To the shareholders of GCB Bank Limited (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 151
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020The Banks and Specialized Deposit-Taking Institution Act, 2016 (Act 930) requires that we state certain matters in our 
report. We hereby state that:
1. We con ﬁr m that the accounts give a true and fair view of the state of the affairs of the Bank and the results of 
operations for the year under review.
2. We were able to obtain all the information and explanation required for the efficient performance of our duties as auditors.
3. We con ﬁr m that the transactions of the entity were within the powers of the Bank.
4. In our opinion, the Bank has generally complied with the provisions of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2008 (Act 749), as amended by the Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment) Act, 2014 (Act 874), the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2008 (Act 762) and Regulations made under these enactments.
5. The Bank has generally complied with the provisions of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).
The engagement partner on the audit resulting in this independent auditor’s report is Daniel Kwadwo Owusu 
(ICAG/P/1327).
For and on behalf of Deloitte & Touche (ICAG/F/2021/129)
Chartered Accountants
The Deloitte Place, Plot No. 71  
Off George Walker Bush Highway 
North Dzorwulu  
Accra, Ghana
23 March, 202 1Independent Auditor’s Report
To the shareholders of GCB Bank Limited (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 152
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2020 2019
  Note(s) Bank Group Bank Group
Interest income 9  1,930,141  1,938,908  1,553,162  1,555,646 
Interest expense 10  (430,255)  (430,210)  (387,355)  (387,194)
Net interest income  1,499,886  1,508,698  1,165,807  1,168,452 
Fee and commission income 11 315,716 329,702  293,127  293,127 
Fee and commission expense 12  (51,722)  (51,722)  (51,622)  (51,622)
Net fee and commission income 263,994 277,980  241,505  241,505 
Net trading income 13 166,628 166,628  141,745  141,745 
Other operating income 14 7,600 14,374  14,388  21,167 
Operating income  1,938,108  1,967,680  1,563,445  1,572,869 
Net impairment loss on ﬁn ancial assets 15  (219,647)  (219,647)  (75,521)  (75,521)
Personnel expenses 17  (559,950)  (561,933)  (496,732)  (497,511)
Depreciation and amortisation 30,31  (142,467)  (142,660)  (125,161)  (125,269)
Other expenses 16  (414,155)  (425,048)  (301,378)  (301,803)
Operating profit 601,889 618,392  564,653  572,765 
Share of pro ﬁt o f associates, net of tax 29 -  (7,566)  -  903 
Profit before income tax 601,889 610,826  564,653  573,668 
Income tax expense 18  (162,388)  (165,437)  (143,650)  (145,211)
Profit for the year 439,501 445,389  421,003  428,457 Statements of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income
For the year ended 31 December 2020Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 153
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2020 2019
Other comprehensive income: Note(s) Bank Group Bank Group
Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss:
Re-measurements on net de ﬁne d bene ﬁt  liability/asset 36 14,192 14,192  (16,528)  (16,528)
Fair value of equity instruments 25 106 (4,113) (2,001)  (27,944)
Income tax relating to items that will not be reclassi ﬁe d 20  (3,563)  3,977  3,663  5,288 
Total items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss 10,735 14,056 (14,866)  (39,184)
Items that may be reclassified to profit or loss:        
Exchange differences on translating foreign operations 29  -  (1,211)  -  18,524 
Share of comprehensive income of associates 29  -  401  -  2,321 
Income tax relating to items that may be reclassi ﬁe d  -  -  -  - 
Total items that may be reclassified to profit or loss  -  (810)  -  20,845 
Other comprehensive income for the year net of taxation 10,735 13,246  (14,866)  (18,339)
Total comprehensive income for the year 450,236 458,635  406,137  410,118 
Profit attributable to:        
Owners of the parent 439,501 445,389  421,003  428,457 
Non-controlling interest -  -   -  - 
  439,501 445,389  421,003  428,457 
Total comprehensive income attributable to:        
Owners of the parent 450,236 458,635  406,137  410,118 
Non-controlling interest - -  -  - 
  450,236 458,635  406,137  410,118 
Earnings per share        
Basic earnings per share (GHp) 21  166  168  159  162 
Diluted earnings per share (GHp) 21  166  168  159  162 
The notes on pages 61 to 141 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statementsStatements of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income
For the year ended 31 December 2020 cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 154
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2020 2019
Note Bank Group Bank Group
Assets          
Cash and cash equivalents 22 1,567,241 1,567,241  1,572,538  1,572,538 
Non-pledged trading assets 23  221,339  221,339  142,790  142,790 
Derivative ﬁn ancial instruments 24  - -  236  236 
Investments (other than securities) 25  2,333  18,534  2,227  15,439 
Loans and advances to customers 26i 3,612,588 3,612,588  3,587,653  3,587,653 
Advances to banks 26ii  200,904  200,904  209,614  209,614 
Investment securities 27 8,575,901 8,622,846  5,996,593  6,025,382 
Investments in associates 29  28,274  91,681  28,274  100,391 
Investments in subsidiary 28  1,000 -  1,000  - 
Deferred tax assets 20  157,455  158,465  101,810  95,324 
Current tax assets 19  26,255  25,808 -  - 
Intangible assets 31  190,921  191,136  201,820  201,820 
Other assets 32  460,432  462,701  300,541  300,555 
Property, equipment and right-of-use assets 30 280,013  280,654  271,645  272,342 
Total assets   15,324,656 15,453,897  12,416,741  12,524,084 
Liabilities          
Deposits from banks & other ﬁn ancial institutions 33i 615,418 615,418  501,911  501,911 
Deposits from customers 33ii 11,352,518 11,345,240  9,340,608  9,320,878 
Borrowings 35  772,525  772,525  457,578  457,578 
Current tax liabilities 19  - -  9,693  9,017 
Employee bene ﬁt  obligation 36  113,322  113,322  118,664  118,664 
Other liabilities 34  421,581  421,394  336,233  335,674 
Total liabilities   13,275,364 13,267,899  10,764,687  10,743,722 
Equity          
Stated capital 37i  500,000  500,000  500,000  500,000 
Retained earnings 1,013,504 1,111,387  736,876  828,873 
Statutory reserve 37ii  569,971  569,971  460,096  460,096 
Fair value reserve 37iv (1,754)  5,395  (1,845)  1,581 
Other reserves 37v (32,429) (755)  (43,073)  (10,188)
Total shareholders’ equity   2,049,292 2,185,998 1,652,054  1,780,362 
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity   15,324,656 15,453,897  12,416,741  12,524,084 
The notes on pages 61 to 141 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
The consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements and the notes on pages 52 to 143 were approved by the Board 
of Directors on 23 March, 2021 and were signed on its behalf by:
Mr. Jude Kofi Arthur
ChairmanMr. John Kofi Adomakoh
Managing DirectorStatements of Financial Position  
As at 31 December 2020Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 155
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 155 GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Bank
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Stated 
capitalFair 
value 
reservesOther 
reservesStatutory 
reservesTotal 
reservesRetained 
earningsTotal 
equity
Balance at 1 January 2020  500,000  (1,845) (43,073)  460,096  415,178  736,878 1,652,056 
Total comprehensive income, 
net of income tax:         
Profit for the year - -  -  -  - 439,501  439,501 
Other comprehensive income, 
net of income tax:
Fair value change in equity 
instruments- 91  -  - 91  -  91
Re-measurement of defined benefit liability - - 10,644  - 10,644  -  10,644
Total other comprehensive income - 91 10,644  - 10,735 -  10,735
Total comprehensive income 
for the year - 91 10,644  - 10,735 439,501  450,236 
Transfer to/from reserves:              
Statutory reserves - -  - 109,875 109,875  (109,875) - 
Total Transfer to/from 
reserves - -  - 109,875 109,875  (109,875) - 
Transactions with owners              
Dividends - -  -  -  - (53,000) (53,000)
Total transactions with equity holders - -  -  -  - (53,000) (53,000)
Balance at 31 December 2020 500,000  (1,754) (32,429) 569,971  535,788  1,013,504 
2,049,292 
The notes on pages 61 to 141 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.Statements of Changes in Equity  
For the year ended 31 December 2020Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 156
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 156 GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Bank
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Stated 
capitalFair value 
reservesOther 
reservesStatutory 
reservesTotal 
reservesRetained 
earningsTotal 
equity
Balance at 1 January 2019 500,000 625 (30,677) 354,845 324,793 500,624 1,325,417
Balance at 1 January 2019 500,000 625 (30,677) 354,845 324,793 500,624 1,325,417
Total comprehensive income, net of 
income tax
Proﬁt for the year - - - - -421,003 421,003
Other comprehensive income, net of 
income tax:-
Fair value change in equity instruments -(2,470) - -(2,470) -(2,470)
Re-measurement of de ﬁned bene ﬁt 
liability - -(12,396) -(12,396) -(12,396)
Total other comprehensive income -(2,470) (12,396) -(14,866) -(14,866)
Total comprehensive income for the year -(2,470) (12,396) -(14,866) 421,003 406,137
Transfer to/from reserves:                  
Statutory reserves - - - 105,251 105,251 (105,251) -
Total Transfer to/from reserves - - - 105,251 105,251 (105,251) -
Transactions with owners
Dividends - - - - -(79,500) (79,500)
Total transactions with equity holders - - - - -(79,500) (79,500)
Balance at 31 December 2019 500,000 (1,845) (43,073) 460,096 415,178 736,876 1,652,054
The notes on pages61 to 141 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.Statements of Changes in Equity  
For the year ended 31 December 2020 cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 157
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Group
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Stated 
capitalFair 
value 
reservesOther 
reservesStatutory 
reservesTotal 
reservesRetained 
earningsTotal 
equity
Balance at 1 January 2020 500,000  1,582 (10,188) 460,096 451,490  828,873 1,780,363 
Total comprehensive income, 
net of income tax:             
Profit for the year - -  -  -  - 445,389  445,389 
Other comprehensive income, 
net of income tax:
Fair value change in equity 
instruments, net of tax-  3,412  -  - 3,412  -  3,412 
Re-measurement of defined 
benefit liability, net of tax- - 10,644  - 10,644  -  10,644 
Share of associate OCI -  401  -  - 401  - 401 
Foreign currency translation 
differences for foreign 
operations - -  (1,211)  - (1,211)  - (1,211)
Total other comprehensive income -  3,813 9,433  - 13,246  -  13,246 
Total comprehensive income for the year -  3,813 9,433  - 13,246 445,389  458,635 
Transfer to/from reserves Statutory reserve - -  - 109,875 109,875 (109,875) - 
Total transfer to/from reserves - -  - 109,875 109,875 (109,875) - 
Transactions with shareholders 
Dividends - -  -  -  - (53,000) (53,000)
Total transactions with equity holders - -  -  -  - (53,000) (53,000)
Balance at 31 December 2020 500,000 
 5,395  (755) 569,971 574,611 1,111,387 2,185,998 
The notes on pages 61 to 141 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.Statements of Changes in Equity  
For the year ended 31 December 2020 cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 158
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Group
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Stated 
capitalFair value 
reservesOther 
reservesStatutory 
reservesTotal 
reservesRetained 
earningsTotal      
equity
Balance at 1 January 2019 500,000 26,048 (16,316) 354,845 364,577 585,167 1,449,744
Impact of IFRS 16 after adoption - - - - - - -
Balance at 1 January 2019 after IFRS 16 
application500,000 26,048 (16,316) 354,845 364,577 585,167 1,449,744
Total comprehensive income, net of 
income tax
Proﬁt for the year - - - - -428,457 428,457
Other comprehensive income, net of 
income tax
Fair value change in equity instru-ments net of tax - (26,788) - -(26,788) -(26,788)
Re-measurement of de ﬁned bene ﬁt 
liability net of tax - (12,396) -(12,396) -(12,396)
Share of associate OCI - 2,321 - - 2,321 - 2,321
Foreign currency translation differenc -
es for Foreign operations - - 18,524 - 18,524 - 18,524
Total other comprehensive income - (24,467) 6,128 -(18,339) -(18,339)
Total comprehensive income for the 
year - (24,467) 6,128 -(18,339) 428,457 410,118
Transfer to/from reserves
Statutory reserve - - - 105,251 105,251 (105,251) -
Total transfer to/from reserves - - - 105,251 105,251 (105,251) -
Transactions with shareholders
Dividends - - - - -(79,500) (79,500)
Total transactions with equity holders - - - - -(79,500) (79,500)
Balance at 31 December 2019 500,000 1,581 (10,188) 460,096 451,489 828,873 1,780,362
The notes on pages 61 to 141 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.Statements of Changes in Equity  
For the year ended 31 December 2020 cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 159
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
 Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis          2020 2019
                                                       Note(s) Bank Group Bank Group
Cash flows from operating activities
Proﬁt  for the period 439,501 445,389  421,003  428,457 
Adjustments for:
Depreciation and amortisation 30  142,467  142,660  125,161  125,269 
Net impairment loss on ﬁn ancial assets 15  219,647  219,647  75,521  75,521 
Employee bene ﬁt  expense 17&36  24,240  24,240  19,583  19,583 
Share of loss/(pro ﬁt ) of associates 29 -  7,566  -  (903)
PPE written off 30  413  413  397  397 
Net interest income 9,10 (1,499,886) (1,508,698) (1,165,807)  (1,168,452)
Dividend income 14  (702)  (7,476)  (2,951)  (8,915)
Proﬁt /Loss on sale of property and equipment 14  435  435  (232)  (232)
Foreign exchange gain 13 (95,835) (95,835) (127,039) (127,039)
Income tax expense 18  162,388  165,437  143,650  145,211 
    (607,332) (606,222) (510,714)  (511,103)
Changes in non-pledged trading assets 23  (78,549)  (78,549)  (62,786)  (62,786)
Changes in derivative assets  236  236  (236)  (236)
Changes in advances to banks 26ii   8,710   8,710  3,372  3,372 
Changes in loans and advances to customers 26i (244,582) (244,582) (864,133)  (864,133)
Changes in other assets 32  (159,891)  (162,146) (128,855)  (148,841) 
Changes in deposit from banks and other ﬁn ancial 
institutions33i  113,507  113,507  229,142  229,142 
Changes in deposits from customers 33ii  2,011,910  2,024,362 1,278,380  1,296,453 
Changes in borrowings 35  314,947  314,947  112,694  112,694 
Changes in other liabilities 34  85,348  85,720  (195,873)  (195,782)
Employee bene ﬁt  paid 36  (15,119)  (15,119)  (15,094)  (15,094)
Cash (used in)/ generated from operations   1,429,185   1,440,864 (154,103)  (156,314)
Interest received  1,910,782  1,919,976  1,694,712  1,720,334
Dividend received           702          7,476  2,951 8,915 
Interest paid   (314,330)   (314,330)  (344,156)  (344,317)
Net income tax paid    (257,544)   (259,426)  (175,792)  (177,291)
Net cash from operating activities    2,768,795   2,794,560  1,023,612  1,051,327
Cash flows from investing activities          
Purchase of investments (other than securities)     25bi  -  (7,207)  -  (2,108)
Purchase of investment securities 27 (2,579,308) (2,597,464)  (1,154,551)  (1,179,348)
Purchase of property, equipment & right-of-use asset 30  (82,039)  (82,221)  (98,209)  (99,019)
Proceeds from the sale of property, equipment & 
right-of- use assets30  456  456 392  392 
Purchase of intangible assets 31  (60,201)  (60,421)  (72,826)  (72,826)
Net cash used in investing activities  (2,721,092) (2,746,857) (1,325,194) (1,352,909)Statements of Cash Flows  
For the year ended 31 December 2020Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 160
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
 Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis   2020 2019
Note Bank Group Bank Group
Cash flows from operating activities
Dividends paid  (53,000)  (53,000)  (79,500)  (79,500)
Net cash used in financing activities     (53,000)   (53,000)  (79,500)  (79,500)
Net (decrease)/increase in cash and cash 
equivalents (5,297) (5,297) (381,082)  (381,082)
Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January 22  1,572,538  1,572,538  1,953,620  1,953,620 
Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 22   1,567,241   1,567,241  1,572,538  1,572,538 
The notes on pages 61 to 141 form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.Statements of Cash Flows  
For the year ended 31 December 2020 (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 161
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
 Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
1.  Reporting entity  
GCB Bank Limited is a limited liability company incorporated and domiciled in Ghana. These consolidated ﬁn ancial 
statements as at and for the year ended 31 December 2020 comprise the Bank and its subsidiary, (together referred 
to as the ‘Group’) and the Group’s interest in associates. The separate ﬁn ancial statements as at and for the year ended 
31 December 2020 comprise the ﬁn ancial statements of the Bank.
The Bank is listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange.
2. New and amended standards and interpretations
2.1.1 Impact of the initial application of Interest Rate Benchmark Reform amendments to IFRS 9 and IFRS 7.
In September 2019, the IASB issued Interest Rate Benchmark Reform (Amendments to IFRS 9, IAS 39 and IFRS 7).
These amendments modify speci ﬁc h edge accounting requirements to allow hedge accounting to continue for affected 
hedges during the period of uncertainty before the hedged items or hedging instruments affected by the current 
interest rate benchmarks are amended as a result of the on-going interest rate benchmark reforms.
The amendments also introduce new disclosure requirements to IFRS 7 for hedging relationships that are subject to 
the exceptions introduced by the amendments to IFRS 9. 
2.1.2 Impact of the initial application of Covid-19-Related Rent Concessions  Amendment to IFRS 16
In May 2020, the IASB issued Covid-19-Related Rent Concessions (Amendment to IFRS 16)  that provides practical relief 
to lessees in accounting for rent concessions occurring as a direct consequence of COVID-19, by introducing a practical 
expedient to IFRS 16. The practical expedient permits a lessee to elect not to assess whether a COVID-19-related rent 
concession is a lease modi ﬁc ation. A lessee that makes this election shall account for any change in lease payments 
resulting from the COVID-19-related rent concession the same way it would account for the change applying IFRS 16 if 
the change were not a lease modi ﬁc ation.
The practical expedient applies only to rent concessions occurring as a direct consequence of COVID-19 and only if all of the following conditions are met:
a. The change in lease payments results in revised consideration for the lease that is substantially the same as, or less than, the consideration for the lease immediately preceding the change;
b. Any reduction in lease payments affects only payments originally due on or before 30 June 2021 (a rent concession meets this condition if it results in reduced lease payments on or before 30 June 2021 and increased lease payments that extend beyond 30 June 2021); and
c. There is no substantive change to other terms and conditions of the lease.
The amendment to IFRS 16 (as issued by the IASB in May 2020) did not impact the operation of the Group during the year.
2.1.3 Impact of the initial application of other new and amended IFRS Standards that are effective for the 
current year
Amendments to References to the Conceptual Framework in IFRS StandardsThe Group has adopted the amendments included in Amendments to References to the Conceptual Framework in IFRS 
Standards 
for the ﬁr st time in the current  year. The amendments include consequential amendments to affected  
Standards so that they refer to the new Framework . Not all amendments,  however, update those pronouncements with 
regard to references to and  quotes from the Framework so that they refer to the revised Conceptual Framework . Some 
pronouncements are only updated to indicate which version  of the Framework they are referencing to (the IASC 
Framework adopted by the  IASB in 2001, the IASB Framework of 2010, or the new revised Framework of 2018) or to 
indicate that de ﬁn itions in the Standard have not been updated with  the new de ﬁn itions developed in the revised 
Conceptual Framework .
The Standards which are amended are IFRS 2, IFRS 3, IFRS 6, IFRS 14, IAS 1, IAS 8, IAS 34, IAS 37, IAS 38, IFRIC 12, IFRIC 
19, IFRIC 20, IFRIC 22, and SIC-32.Notes to the Financial StatementsBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 162
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d2. New and amended standards and interpretations (cont’d)
2.1.4 Amendments to IFRS 3 Definition of a business
The Group has adopted the amendments to IFRS 3 for the ﬁr st time in the current year. The amendments clarify that 
while businesses usually have outputs, outputs are not required for an integrated set of activities and assets to qualify 
as a business. To be considered a business, an acquired set of activities and assets must include, at a minimum, an 
input and a substantive process that together signi ﬁc antly contribute to the ability to create outputs.
The amendments remove the assessment of whether market participants are capable of replacing any missing inputs or processes and continuing to produce outputs. The amendments also introduce additional guidance that helps to determine whether a substantive process has been acquired.
The amendments introduce an optional concentration test that permits a simpli ﬁe d assessment of whether an acquired 
set of activities and assets is not a business. Under the optional concentration test, the acquired set of activities and assets is not a business if substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired is concentrated in a single 
identi ﬁabl e asset or group of similar assets. The amendments are applied prospectively to all business combinations 
and asset acquisitions for which the acquisition date is on or after 1 January 2020. 
The Group did not engage in any business acquisition during the year under review.
2.1.5 Amendments to IAS 1 and IAS 8 Definition of material
The Group has adopted the amendments to IAS 1 and IAS 8 for the ﬁr st time in the current year. The amendments 
make the de ﬁn ition of material in IAS 1 easier to understand and are not intended to alter the underlying concept of 
materiality in IFRS Standards. The concept of ‘obscuring’ material information with immaterial information has been 
included as part of the new de ﬁn ition.
The threshold for materiality influencing users has been changed from ‘could influence’ to ‘could reasonably be 
expected to influence’. The de ﬁn ition of material in IAS 8 has been replaced by a reference to the de ﬁn ition of material 
in IAS 1. In addition, the IASB amended other Standards and the Conceptual Framework that contain a de ﬁn ition of 
‘material’ or refer to the term ‘material’ to ensure consistency.
2.2  Standards issued but not yet effective 
At the date of authorisation of these ﬁn ancial statements, the Group has not applied the following new and revised 
IFRS Standards that have been issued but are not yet effective:
2.2.1  IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts
IFRS 17 establishes the principles for the recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of insurance contracts 
and supersedes IFRS 4 Insurance Contracts .
IFRS 17 outlines a general model, which is modi ﬁe d for insurance contracts with direct participation features, described 
as the variable fee approach. The general model is simpli ﬁe d if certain criteria are met by measuring the liability for 
remaining coverage using the premium allocation approach.
The general model uses current assumptions to estimate the amount, timing and uncertainty of future cash flows and 
it explicitly measures the cost of that uncertainty. It takes into account market interest rates and the impact of policyholders’ options and guarantees.
In June 2020, the IASB issued Amendments to IFRS 17 to address concerns and implementation challenges that were 
identi ﬁe d after IFRS 17 was published. The amendments defer the date of initial application of IFRS 17 (incorporating 
the amendments) to annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023. At the same time, the IASB issued 
Extension of the Temporary Exemption from Applying IFRS 9 (Amendments to IFRS 4) that extends the ﬁx ed expiry 
date of the temporary exemption from applying IFRS 9 in IFRS 4 to annual reporting periods beginning on or after 
1 January 2023.
IFRS 17 must be applied retrospectively unless impracticable, in which case the modi ﬁe d retrospective approach or the 
fair value approach is applied.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 163
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d2. New and amended standards and interpretations (cont’d)
2.2.1 IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts (cont’d)
For the purpose of the transition requirements, the date of initial application is the start of the annual reporting period 
in which the entity ﬁr st applies the Standard, and the transition date is the beginning of the period immediately 
preceding the date of initial application.
2.2.2  Amendments to IFRS 10 and IAS 28 – Sale or Contribution of Assets between an Investor and its Associate 
or Joint Venture
The amendments to IFRS 10 and IAS 28 deal with situations where there is a sale or contribution of assets between an 
investor and its associate or joint venture. Speci ﬁc ally, the amendments state that gains or losses resulting from the 
loss of control of a subsidiary that does not contain a business in a transaction with an associate or a joint venture that 
is accounted for using the equity method, are recognised in the parent’s pro ﬁ t or loss only to the extent of the 
unrelated investors’ interests in that associate or joint venture. Similarly, gains and losses resulting from the re-
measurement of investments retained in any former subsidiary (that has become an associate or a joint venture that 
is accounted for using the equity method) to fair value are recognised in the former parent’s pro ﬁ t or loss only to the 
extent of the unrelated investors’ interests in the new associate or joint venture.
The effective date of the amendments is yet to be set by the Board; however, earlier application of the amendments is 
permitted. The directors of the Group anticipate that the application of these amendments may have an impact on the 
Group’s consolidated ﬁn ancial statements in future periods should such transactions arise.
2.2.3  Amendments to IAS 1 – Classification of Liabilities as Current or Non-current
The amendments to IAS 1 affect only the presentation of liabilities as current or non-current in the statement of 
ﬁn ancial position and not the amount or timing of recognition of any asset, liability, income or expenses, or the 
information disclosed about those items.
The amendments clarify that the classi ﬁc ation of liabilities as current or non-current is based on rights that are in 
existence at the end of the reporting period, specify that classi ﬁc ation is unaffected by expectations about whether an 
entity will exercise its right to defer settlement of a liability, explain that rights are in existence if covenants are 
complied with at the end of the reporting period, and introduce a de ﬁn ition of ‘settlement’ to make clear that settlement 
refers to the transfer to the counterparty of cash, equity instruments, other assets or services.
The amendments are applied retrospectively for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023, with early 
application permitted.
2.2.4  Amendments to IFRS 3 – Reference to the Conceptual Framework
The amendments update IFRS 3 so that it refers to the 2018 Conceptual Framework  instead of the 1989 Framework.
They also add to IFRS 3 a requirement that, for obligations within the scope of IAS 37, an acquirer applies IAS 37 to 
determine whether at the acquisition date a present obligation exists as a result of past events. For a levy that would be within the scope of IFRIC 21 Levies , the acquirer applies IFRIC 21 to determine whether the obligating event that 
gives rise to a liability to pay the levy has occurred by the acquisition date.
Finally, the amendments add an explicit statement that an acquirer does not recognise contingent assets acquired in 
a business combination.
The amendments are effective for business combinations for which the date of acquisition is on or after the beginning 
of the ﬁr st annual period beginning on or after 1 January 2022. Early application is permitted if an entity also applies 
all other updated references (published together with the updated Conceptual Framework ) at the same time or earlier.
2.2.5  Amendments to IAS 16 – Property, Plant and Equipment—Proceeds before Intended Use
The amendments prohibit deducting from the cost of an item of property, plant and equipment any proceeds from 
selling items produced before that asset is available for use, i.e. proceeds while bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management. Consequently, an entity 
recognises such sales proceeds and related costs in pro ﬁ t or loss. The entity measures the cost of those items in 
accordance with IAS 2 Inventories.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 164
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d2. New and amended standards and interpretations (cont’d)
2.2.5  Amendments to IAS 16 – Property, Plant and Equipment—Proceeds before Intended Use (cont’d)
The amendments also clarify the meaning of ‘testing whether an asset is functioning properly’. IAS 16 now speci ﬁe s 
this as assessing whether the technical and physical performance of the asset is such that it is capable of being used 
in the production or supply of goods or services, for rental to others, or for administrative purposes.
If not presented separately in the statement of comprehensive income, the ﬁn ancial statements shall disclose the 
amounts of proceeds and cost included in pro ﬁ t or loss that relate to items produced that are not an output of the 
entity’s ordinary activities, and which line item(s) in the statement of comprehensive income include(s) such proceeds and cost.
The amendments are applied retrospectively, but only to items of property, plant and equipment that are brought to 
the location and condition necessary for them to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management on 
or after the beginning of the earliest period presented in the ﬁn ancial statements in which the entity ﬁr st applies the 
amendments.
The entity shall recognise the cumulative effect of initially applying the amendments as an adjustment to the opening 
balance of retained earnings (or other component of equity, as appropriate) at the beginning of that earliest period presented.
The amendments are effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022, with early application permitted.
2.2.6  Amendments to IAS 37 – Onerous Contracts—Cost of Fulfilling a Contract
The amendments specify that the ‘cost of ful ﬁl ling’ a contract comprises the ‘costs that relate directly to the contract’. 
Costs that relate directly to a contract consist of both the incremental costs of ful ﬁl ling that contract (examples would 
be direct labour or materials) and an allocation of other costs that relate directly to ful ﬁl ling contracts (an example 
would be the allocation of the depreciation charge for an item of property, plant and equipment used in ful ﬁl ling the 
contract).
The amendments apply to contracts for which the entity has not yet ful ﬁl led all its obligations at the beginning of the 
annual reporting period in which the entity ﬁr st applies the amendments. Comparatives are not restated. Instead, the 
entity shall recognise the cumulative effect of initially applying the amendments as an adjustment to the opening 
balance of retained earnings or other component of equity, as appropriate, at the date of initial application.
The amendments are effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022, with early application permitted.
2.2.7  Annual Improvements to IFRS Standards 2018–2020
The Annual Improvements  include amendments to four Standards.
IFRS 1 First-time Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards
The amendment provides additional relief to a subsidiary which becomes a ﬁr st-time adopter later than its parent in 
respect of accounting for cumulative translation differences. As a result of the amendment, a subsidiary that uses the 
exemption in IFRS 1:D16 (a) can now also elect to measure cumulative translation differences for all foreign operations 
at the carrying amount that would be included in the parent’s consolidated ﬁn ancial statements, based on the parent’s 
date of transition to IFRS Standards, if no adjustments were made for consolidation procedures and for the effects of the business combination in which the parent acquired the subsidiary. A similar election is available to an associate or joint venture that uses the exemption in IFRS 1:D16 (a).
The amendment is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022, with early application permitted.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments
The amendment clari ﬁe s that in applying the ‘10 per cent’ test to assess whether to derecognise a ﬁn ancial liability, Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 165
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d2. New and amended standards and interpretations (cont’d)
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments (Cont’d)
an entity includes only fees paid or received between the entity (the borrower) and the lender, including fees paid or 
received by either the entity or the lender on the other’s behalf.
The amendment is applied prospectively to modi ﬁc ations and exchanges that occur on or after the date the entity ﬁr st 
applies the amendment. The amendment is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022, with 
early application permitted.
IFRS 16 Leases
The amendment removes the illustration of the reimbursement of leasehold improvements. As the amendment to 
IFRS 16 only regards an illustrative example, no effective date is stated. 
IAS 41 Agriculture
The amendment removes the requirement in IAS 41 for entities to exclude cash flows for taxation when measuring fair 
value. This aligns the fair value measurement in IAS 41 with the requirements of IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement  to use 
internally consistent cash flows and discount rates and enables preparers to determine whether to use pre-tax or post-tax cash flows and discount rates for the most appropriate fair value measurement.
The amendment is applied prospectively, i.e. for fair value measurements on or after the date an entity initially applies 
the amendment.
The amendment is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022, with early application permitted.
3.  Basis of preparation3.1 Statement of compliance
The consolidated and separate ﬁn ancial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial 
Reporting Standards (“IFRS as issued by the IASB”) and in the manner required by the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992), 
and the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).
3.2  Basis of measurement
The ﬁn ancial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis, except for following material items, which are 
measured at fair value:
• derivative ﬁn ancial instruments, 
• ﬁn ancial assets measured at fair value and,
• deﬁne d bene ﬁt  obligations measured at the present value of the de ﬁne d bene ﬁt  obligation.
Historical cost is generally the original consideration given in exchange for goods and services.
The Group’s accounting policy on fair value is set out in note 7.
3.3  Functional and presentation currency
The ﬁn ancial statements are presented in Ghana Cedis, which is the Bank’s functional currency. All ﬁn ancial information 
presented in Ghana Cedis have been rounded to the nearest thousands, except when otherwise indicated.3.4  Presentation of financial statements
The Group presents its statement of ﬁn ancial position in order of liquidity based on the Group’s intention and perceived 
ability to recover/settle the majority of assets/liabilities of the corresponding ﬁn ancial statement line item. An analysis 
regarding recovery or settlement within 12 months after the reporting date (current) and more than 12 months after 
the reporting date (non–current) is presented under a note item where applicable.
Financial assets and ﬁn ancial liabilities are generally reported gross in the consolidated statement of ﬁn ancial position 
except when IFRS netting criteria are met.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 166
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d4.  Summary of significant accounting policies
The accounting policies set out below have been applied consistently to all the periods presented in these ﬁn ancial 
statements and have been applied consistently by Group entities.
4.1  Basis of consolidation
The consolidated ﬁn ancial statements incorporate the ﬁn ancial statements of the Bank and entity controlled by the 
Bank (its subsidiary) made up to 31 December each year. Control is achieved when the Company:
• has the power over the investee;
• is exposed, or has rights, to variable returns from its involvement with the investee; and
• has the ability to use its power to affects its returns.  
The Company reassesses whether or not it controls an investee if facts and circumstances indicate that there are 
changes to one or more of the three elements of control listed above. 
i. Subsidiary
The subsidiary is an investee controlled by the Group. The ﬁn ancial statements of the subsidiary are included in the 
consolidated ﬁn ancial statements from the date on which control commences until the date when control ceases. The 
ﬁn ancial statements of the subsidiary used to prepare the consolidated ﬁn ancial statements were prepared as of the 
Bank’s reporting date. The subsidiary’s ﬁn ancial statements are prepared in accordance with Group accounting policies.
There were no non-controlling interests in subsidiaries.
ii. Transactions eliminated on consolidation
Intra Group balances and transactions and any unrealised income and expenses (except foreign currency transaction 
gains or losses) arising from intra Group transactions, are eliminated in preparing the consolidated ﬁn ancial statements. 
Unrealised losses are eliminated in the same way as unrealised gains, but only to the extent that there is no evidence of impairment.
iii. Associates
Associates are all entities over which the Bank has signi ﬁc ant influence but not control, generally accompanying a 
shareholding of between 20% and 50% of voting rights. Investment in associates are accounted for using the equity method of accounting and are initially recognised at cost.
iv. Change in ownership interest of a subsidiary
A change in ownership interest of a subsidiary, without loss of control, is accounted for as an equity transaction. The carrying amount of the Group’s interests and any non-controlling interests are adjusted to reflect the changes in their 
relative interests in the subsidiaries. If the Group loses control over a subsidiary, it derecognises the assets and liabilities 
of the subsidiary, any related non-controlling interests and other components of equity. Any surplus or de ﬁc it arising 
on the loss of control is recognised in pro ﬁ t or loss. Any retained interest in the former subsidiary is recognised at fair 
value at the date of loss of control. 
v. Separate ﬁnancial statements
In the separate ﬁn ancial statements, investments in subsidiaries and associates are accounted for at cost less 
impairment. Cost also includes direct attributable costs of investment.
4.2  Foreign currency 
4.2.1 Foreign currency transactions
Transactions in foreign currencies are translated into the respective functional currency of the Group entities using 
exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the reporting date are translated to the Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 167
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d4.  Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.2 Foreign currency (cont’d)
4.2.1 Foreign currency transactions (cont’d)
functional currency at exchange rates ruling at that date. Non-monetary items that are measured at historical cost in a 
foreign currency are translated using the spot exchange rate at the date of the transaction.
Foreign currency differences arising on retranslation are generally recognised in pro ﬁ t or loss.
Foreign exchange gains and losses arising from the translation of items recognised in other comprehensive income are 
presented in other comprehensive income.
4.2.2 Foreign operations
The assets and liabilities of foreign operations are translated into Ghana Cedis at the spot exchange rates at the 
reporting date. The income and expenses of foreign operations are translated into Ghana Cedis at the average exchange 
rates for the period. 
Foreign currency differences arising on the translation are recognised in other comprehensive income and presented 
within equity.
When a foreign operation is disposed of, the cumulative amount in equity relating to that foreign operation is reclassi ﬁe d 
to pro ﬁ t or loss as part of the gain or loss on disposal.
Exchange differences are recognised in pro ﬁ t or loss in the period in which they arise except for:
• exchange differences on foreign currency borrowings relating to assets under construction for future productive use, which are included in the cost of those assets when they are regarded as an adjustment to interest costs on those foreign currency borrowings;
• exchange differences on transactions entered into to hedge certain foreign currency risks and
• exchange differences on monetary items receivable from or payable to a foreign operation for which settlement is neither planned nor likely to occur in the foreseeable future (therefore forming part of the net investment in the 
foreign operation), which are recognised initially in other comprehensive income and reclassi ﬁe d from equity to 
proﬁ t or loss on disposal or partial disposal of the net investment.
For the purpose of presenting consolidated ﬁn ancial statements, the assets and liabilities of the Group’s foreign 
operations are translated at exchange rates prevailing on the reporting date. Income and expense items are translated 
at the average exchange rates for the period, unless exchange rates fluctuate signi ﬁc antly during that period, in which 
case the exchange rates at the date of transactions are used. Exchange differences arising, if any, are recognised in 
other comprehensive income and accumulated in a foreign exchange translation reserve.
On the disposal of a foreign operation (i.e. a disposal of the Group’s entire interest in a foreign operation, or a disposal 
involving loss of control over a subsidiary that includes a foreign operation or a partial disposal of an interest in a joint 
arrangement or an associate that includes a foreign operation of which the retained interest becomes a ﬁn ancial 
asset), all of the exchange differences accumulated in a foreign exchange translation reserve in respect of that operation 
attributable to the owners of the Company are reclassi ﬁe d to pro ﬁ t or loss.
In addition, in relation to a partial disposal of a subsidiary that includes a foreign operation that does not result in the Group losing control over the subsidiary, the proportionate share of accumulated exchange differences are re-attributed 
to non-controlling interests and are not recognised in pro ﬁ t or loss. For all other partial disposals (i.e. partial disposals 
of associates or joint arrangements that do not result in the Group losing signi ﬁc ant influence or joint control), the 
proportionate share of the accumulated exchange differences is reclassi ﬁe d to pro ﬁ t or loss.  
4.3  Revenue recognition 
The Group recognises revenue from the following major sources:
•  Interest income
•  Fee and commission income and expense
•  Net trading income 
•  Dividend incomeBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 168
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.3  Revenue recognition (cont’d) 
Revenue is measured based on the consideration to which the Group expects to be entitled in a contract with a 
customer and excludes amounts collected on behalf of third parties. The Group recognises revenue when it transfers control of a product or service to a customer.
4.3.1 Recognition of interest income
The effective interest rate method (EIR)
Under IFRS 9, interest income is recorded using the EIR method for all ﬁn ancial assets measured at amortised cost, 
interest rate derivatives for which hedge accounting is applied and the related amortisation/recycling effect of hedge 
accounting. Interest income on interest bearing ﬁn ancial assets measured at FVTOCI under IFRS 9 is also recorded 
using the EIR method. Interest expense is also calculated using the EIR method for all ﬁn ancial liabilities held at 
amortised cost. The EIR is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash receipts through the expected life of 
the ﬁn ancial asset or liability or, when appropriate, a shorter period, to the gross carrying amount of the ﬁn ancial asset.
The EIR (and therefore, the amortised cost of the ﬁn ancial asset) is calculated by taking into account transaction costs 
and any discount or premium on the acquisition of the ﬁn ancial asset, as well as fees and costs that are an integral part 
of the EIR. The Bank recognises interest income using a rate of return that represents the best estimate of a constant 
rate of return over the expected life of the loan. Hence, the EIR calculation also takes into account the effect of 
potentially different interest rates that may be charged at various stages of the ﬁn ancial asset’s expected life, and other 
characteristics of the product life cycle (including prepayments, penalty interest and charges).
Expectations of ﬁx ed rate ﬁn ancial assets’ or liabilities’ cash flows are revised for reasons other than credit risk, then 
changes to future contractual cash flows are discounted at the original EIR with a consequential adjustment to the carrying amount. The difference from the previous carrying amount is booked as a positive or negative adjustment to 
the carrying amount of the ﬁn ancial asset or liability on the balance sheet with a corresponding increase or decrease 
in Interest revenue/expense calculated using the effective interest method .
For floating-rate ﬁn ancial instruments, periodic re-estimation of cash flows to reflect the movements in the market 
rates of interest also alters the effective interest rate, but when instruments were initially recognised at an amount 
equal to the principal, re-estimating the future interest payments does not signi ﬁc antly affect the carrying amount of 
the asset or the liability.
Interest and similar income/expense
Net interest income comprises interest income and interest expense calculated using both the effective interest 
method and other methods. These are disclosed separately on the face of the income statement for both interest income and interest expense to provide symmetrical and comparable information.
In its Interest income/expense calculated using the effective interest method, the Group only includes interest on 
those ﬁn ancial instruments that are set out in Note 4.
Interest income/expense on all trading ﬁn ancial assets/liabilities is recognised as a part of the fair value change in ‘Net 
trading income’.
The Group calculates interest income on ﬁn ancial assets, other than those considered credit-impaired, by applying the 
EIR to the gross carrying amount of the ﬁn ancial asset.
When a ﬁn ancial asset becomes credit-impaired (as set out in Note 4.10 and is therefore regarded as ‘Stage 3’, the 
Group calculates interest income by applying the EIR to the net amortised cost of the ﬁn ancial asset. If the ﬁn ancial 
asset cures (as outlined in Note 4.10) and is no longer credit-impaired, the Bank reverts to calculating interest income 
on a gross basis.
For purchased or originated credit-impaired (POCI) ﬁn ancial assets (as set out in Note 4.10), the Group calculates Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 169
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.3  Revenue recognition (cont’d) 
4.3.1 Recognition of interest income (cont’d)
Interest and similar income/expense (cont’d)
interest income by calculating the credit-adjusted EIR and applying that rate to the amortised cost of the ﬁn ancial 
asset. The credit-adjusted EIR is the interest rate that, at initial recognition, discounts the estimated future cash flows 
(including credit losses) to the amortised cost of the POCI ﬁn ancial asset.
4.3.2  Fee and commission income and expense
Fee and commission income and expense include fees other than those that are an integral part of EIR. The fees 
included in this part of the Group’s consolidated statement of pro ﬁ t or loss include among other things fees charged 
for servicing a loan, non-utilisation fees relating to loan commitments when it is unlikely that these will result in a 
speci ﬁc  lending arrangement and loan syndication fees.
Other fees and commission income and expenses are recognised on an accrual basis when the related services are 
performed. Loan commitment fees for loans that are not likely to be drawn down are deferred, together with related direct costs and recognised on a straight line basis over the commitment period.
Other fees and commission expenses, which relate mainly to transaction and service fees are expensed as the related 
services are performed.
4.3.3   Net trading income
Net trading income comprises gains less losses related to foreign exchange differences on foreign currency deal 
transactions as well as all realised and unrealised fair value changes related to held-for-trading investment securities. The Group has elected to present the full fair value movement of trading assets and liabilities in trading income, 
including any related interest income, expense and dividends.
4.3.4  Dividend income
Dividend income is recognised when the right to receive payment is established. This is the ex-dividend date for listed 
equity securities, and usually the date when shareholders approve the dividend for unlisted equity securities.
The presentation of dividend income in the consolidated statement of pro ﬁ t or loss depends on the classi ﬁc ation and 
measurement of the equity investment, i.e.:
• for equity instruments which are held for trading, dividend income is presented as trading income;
• for equity instruments designated at FVTOCI dividend income is presented in other/revenue income; and
• for equity instruments not designated at FVTOCI and not held for trading, dividend income is presented as net 
income from other instruments at FVTPL.
4.4  Financial instruments 
4.4.1  Initial recognition
4.4.1.1  Date of recognition
Financial assets and liabilities, with the exception of loans and advances to customers and balances due to customers, 
are initially recognised on the trade date, i.e., the date on which the Group becomes a party to the contractual 
provisions of the instrument. This includes regular way trades, i.e., purchases or sales of ﬁn ancial assets that require 
delivery of assets within the time frame generally established by regulation or convention in the market place. Loans 
and advances to customers are recognised when funds are transferred to the customers’ accounts. The Group 
recognises balances due to customers when funds are transferred to the Group.
4.4.1.2  I nitial measurement of financial instruments
The classi ﬁc ation of ﬁn ancial instruments at initial recognition depends on their contractual terms and the business 
model for managing the instruments, as described in Notes 4.7. Financial instruments are initially measured at their 
fair value (as de ﬁn ed in Note 4.6), except in the case of ﬁn ancial assets and ﬁn ancial liabilities recorded at FVTPL, 
transaction costs are added to, or subtracted from, this amount. Trade receivables are measured at the transaction 
price. When the fair value of ﬁn ancial instruments at initial recognition differs from the transaction price, the Group 
accounts for the Day 1 pro ﬁ t or loss, as described below.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 170
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.4  Financial instruments (cont’d) 
4.4.1  Initial recognition (cont’d)
4.4.1.3  Day 1 profit or loss
When the transaction price of the instrument differs from the fair value at origination and the fair value is based on a 
valuation technique using only inputs observable in market transactions, the Group recognises the difference between 
the transaction price and fair value in net trading income. In those cases where fair value is based on models for which some of the inputs are not observable, the difference between the transaction price and the fair value is deferred and 
is only recognised in pro ﬁ t or loss when the inputs become observable, or when the instrument is derecognised.
4.5  Measurement categories of financial assets and liabilities
The Group classi ﬁe s all of its ﬁn ancial assets based on the business model for managing the assets and the asset’s 
contractual terms (as explained in 4.7), measured at either:
• Amortised cost
• FVTOCI
• FVTPL
4.5.1  Initial recognition
The Group classi ﬁe s and measures its derivative and trading portfolio at FVTPL, as explained in Notes 4.7.2 and 4.7.3. 
The Group may designate ﬁn ancial instruments at FVTPL, if so doing eliminates or signi ﬁc antly reduces measurement 
or recognition inconsistencies, as explained in Note 4.7.2. Financial liabilities, other than loan commitments and 
ﬁn ancial guarantees, are measured at amortised cost or at FVTPL when they are held for trading and derivative 
instruments or the fair value designation is applied, as explained in Notes 4.7.1 and 4.7.2
4.6  Determination of fair value
In order to show how fair values have been derived, ﬁn ancial instruments are classi ﬁe d based on a hierarchy of 
valuation techniques, as summarised below:
• Level 1 ﬁn ancial instruments − These are where the inputs used in the valuation are unadjusted quoted prices from 
active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the Group has access to at the measurement date. The Group 
considers markets as active only if there are sufficient trading activities with regards to the volume and liquidity of the identical assets or liabilities and when there are binding and exercisable price quotes available on the balance sheet 
date.
• Level 2 ﬁn ancial instruments − These are where the inputs that are used for valuation are signi ﬁc ant, and are derived 
from directly or indirectly observable market data available over the entire period of the instrument’s life. Such inputs 
include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical instruments in inactive markets and observable inputs other than quoted prices such as interest rates and yield curves, implied 
volatilities, and credit spreads. In addition, adjustments may be required for the condition or location of the asset or 
the extent to which it relates to items that are comparable to the valued instrument. However, if such adjustments are 
based on unobservable inputs which are signi ﬁc ant to the entire measurement, the Group will classify the instruments 
as Level 3.
• Level 3 ﬁn ancial instruments − These include one or more unobservable input that is signi ﬁc ant to the measurement 
as whole.
The Group periodically reviews its valuation techniques including the adopted methodologies and model calibrations. 
However, the base models may not fully capture all factors relevant to the valuation of the Bank’s ﬁn ancial instruments 
such as credit risk (CVA), own credit (DVA) and/or funding costs (FVA). Therefore, the Bank applies various techniques 
to estimate the credit risk associated with its ﬁn ancial instruments measured at fair value, Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 171
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.6 Determination of fair value (cont’d)
• Level 3 ﬁn ancial instruments (cont’d)
which include a portfolio-based approach that estimates the expected net exposure per counterparty over the full 
lifetime of the individual assets, in order to reflect the credit risk of the individual counterparties for non-collateralised 
ﬁn ancial instruments. The Bank estimates the value of its own credit from market observable data, such as secondary 
prices for its traded debt and the credit spread on credit default swaps and traded debts on itself. 
The Bank evaluates the levelling at each reporting period on an instrument-by-instrument basis and reclassi ﬁe s 
instruments when necessary, based on the facts at the end of the reporting period.
4.7  Financial assets and liabilities
4.7.1  Advances to banks, Loans and advances to customers, Financial investments at amortised cost
The Group measures Advances to banks, Loans and advances to customers and other ﬁn ancial investments at 
amortised cost only if both of the following conditions are met:
• The ﬁn ancial asset is held within a business model with the objective to hold ﬁn ancial assets in order to collect 
contractual cash flows
• The contractual terms of the ﬁn ancial asset give rise on speci ﬁe d dates to cash flows that are solely payments of 
principal and interest (SPPI) on the principal amount outstanding.
The details of these conditions are outlined below.
4.7.1.1  Business model assessment
The Group determines its business model at the level that best reflects how it manages groups of ﬁn ancial assets to 
achieve its business objective:
• The risks that affect the performance of the business model (and the ﬁn ancial assets held within that business 
model) and, in particular, the way those risks are managed;
• How managers of the business are compensated (for example, whether the compensation is based on the fair value 
of the assets managed or on the contractual cash flows collected).
The expected frequency, value and timing of sales are also important aspects of the Group’s assessment. The business model assessment is based on reasonably expected scenarios without taking ‘worst case’ or ‘stress case’ scenarios into account. If cash flows after initial recognition are realised in a way that is different from the Group’s original 
expectations, the Group does not change the classi ﬁc ation of the remaining ﬁn ancial assets held in that business 
model, but incorporates such information when assessing newly originated or newly purchased ﬁn ancial assets going 
forward.
4.7.1.2  The SPPI test 
As a second step of its classi ﬁc ation process, the Group assesses the contractual terms of the ﬁn ancial asset to identify 
whether they meet the SPPI test. ‘Principal’ for the purpose of this test is de ﬁn ed as the fair value of the ﬁn ancial asset 
at initial recognition and may change over the life of the ﬁn ancial asset (for example, if there are repayments of 
principal or amortisation of the premium/discount).The most signi ﬁc ant elements of interest within a lending 
arrangement are typically the consideration for the time value of money and credit risk. To make the SPPI assessment, 
the Group applies judgement and considers relevant factors such as the currency in which the ﬁn ancial asset is 
denominated, and the period for which the interest rate is set.In contrast, contractual terms that introduce a more than de minimis  exposure to risks or volatility in the contractual 
cash flows that are unrelated to a basic lending arrangement do not give rise to contractual cash flows that are solely 
payments of principal and interest on the amount outstanding. In such cases, the ﬁn ancial asset is required to be 
measured at FVTPL.4.7.2  Derivatives recorded at fair value through profit or loss
A derivative is a ﬁn ancial instrument or other contract with all three of the following characteristics:
• Its value changes in response to the change in a speci ﬁe d interest rate, ﬁn ancial instrument price, commodity Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 172
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.7  Financial assets and liabilities (cont’d)
4.7.2  Derivatives recorded at fair value through profit or loss (cont’d)
 price, foreign exchange rate, index of prices or rates, credit rating or credit index, or other variable, provided that, 
in the case of a non- ﬁn ancial variable, it is not speci ﬁc t o a party to the contract (i.e., the ‘underlying’).
• It requires no initial net investment or an initial net investment that is smaller than would be required for other types 
of contracts expected to have a similar response to changes in market factors.
• It is settled at a future date.
The Group enters into derivative transactions with various counterparties. These include forward foreign exchange contracts and, foreign currencies. Derivatives are recorded at fair value and carried as assets when their fair value is positive and as liabilities when their fair value is negative. The notional amount and fair value of such derivatives are 
disclosed separately in Note 24. Changes in the fair value of derivatives are included in net trading income unless 
hedge accounting is applied. 
The derivative asset held by the Group was disposed of in the course of the period under review.4.7.2.1  Embedded derivativesAn embedded derivative is a component of a hybrid instrument that also includes a non-derivative host contract with 
the effect that some of the cash flows of the combined instrument vary in a way similar to a stand-alone derivative. An embedded derivative causes some or all of the cash flows that otherwise would be required by the contract to be 
modi ﬁe d according to a speci ﬁe d interest rate, ﬁn ancial instrument price, commodity price, foreign exchange rate, 
index of prices or rates, credit rating or credit index, or other variable, provided that, in the case of a non- ﬁn ancial 
variable, it is not speci ﬁc t o a party to the contract. A derivative that is attached to a ﬁn ancial instrument, but is 
contractually transferable independently of that instrument, or has a different counterparty from that instrument, is 
not an embedded derivative, but a separate ﬁn ancial instrument. Derivatives embedded in ﬁn ancial liability or a non-
ﬁn ancial host are separated from the host and accounted for as separate derivatives if: the economic characteristics 
and risks are not closely related to the host; a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative 
would meet the de ﬁn ition of a derivative (as de ﬁn ed above); and the hybrid contract is not measured at fair value 
through pro ﬁ t or loss. Embedded derivatives are measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognised in pro ﬁ t 
or loss. Reassessment only occurs if there is either a change in the terms of the contract that signi ﬁc antly modi ﬁe s the 
cash flows that would otherwise be required or a reclassi ﬁc ation of a ﬁn ancial asset out of the fair value through pro ﬁ t 
or loss category.
Financial assets are classi ﬁe d in their entirety based on the business model and SPPI assessments as outlined in Notes 
4.7.1.1 and 4.7.1.2.
4.7.3  Financial assets or financial liabilities held for trading
The Group classi ﬁe s ﬁn ancial assets or ﬁn ancial liabilities as held for trading when they have been purchased or issued 
primarily for short-term pro ﬁ t-making through trading activities or form part of a portfolio of ﬁn ancial instruments that 
are managed together, for which there is evidence of a recent pattern of short-term pro ﬁ t taking. Held-for-trading 
assets and liabilities are recorded and measured in the statement of ﬁn ancial position at fair value. Changes in fair 
value are recognised in net trading income. Interest and dividend income or expense is recorded in net trading income 
according to the terms of the contract, or when the right to payment has been established.
Included in this classi ﬁc ation are debt securities, equities, short positions and customer loans that have been acquired 
principally for the purpose of selling or repurchasing in the near term.
4.7.4  Debt instruments at FVTOCI
The Group classi ﬁe s debt instruments at FVTOCI when both of the following conditions are met:
• The instrument is held within a business model, the objective of which is achieved by both collecting contractual 
cash flows and selling ﬁn ancial assets; andBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 173
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.7 Financial assets and liabilities (cont’d)
4.7.4  Debt instruments at FVTOCI (cont’d)
• The contractual terms of the ﬁn ancial asset meet the SPPI test.
FVTOCI debt instruments are subsequently measured at fair value with gains and losses arising due to changes in fair 
value recognised in OCI. Interest income and foreign exchange gains and losses are recognised in pro ﬁ t or loss in the 
same manner as for ﬁn ancial assets measured at amortised cost as explained in Note 4.3.1. The ECL calculation for 
Debt instruments at FVTOCI is explained in Note 4.10.1. Where the Bank holds more than one investment in the same 
security, they are deemed to be disposed of on a ﬁr st–in ﬁr st–out basis. On derecognition, cumulative gains or losses 
previously recognised in OCI are reclassi ﬁe d from OCI to pro ﬁ t or loss.
4.7.5  Equity instruments at FVTOCI
Upon initial recognition, the Bank occasionally elects to classify irrevocably some of its equity investments as equity 
instruments at FVTOCI when they meet the de ﬁn ition of Equity under IAS 32 Financial Instruments: Presentation  and 
are not held for trading. Such classi ﬁc ation is determined on an instrument-by instrument basis.
Gains and losses on these equity instruments are never recycled to pro ﬁ t. Dividends are recognised in pro ﬁ t or loss 
as other operating income when the right of the payment has been established, except when the Group bene ﬁ ts from 
such proceeds as a recovery of part of the cost of the instrument, in which case, such gains are recorded in OCI. Equity 
instruments at FVTOCI are not subject to an impairment assessment.
4.7.6  Financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss
Financial assets and ﬁn ancial liabilities in this category are those that are not held for trading and have been either 
designated by management upon initial recognition or are mandatorily required to be measured at fair value under 
IFRS 9. Management only designates an instrument at FVTPL upon initial recognition when one of the following criteria are met. Such designation is determined on an instrument-by-instrument basis:
• The designation eliminates, or signi ﬁc antly reduces, the inconsistent treatment that would otherwise arise from 
measuring the assets or liabilities or recognising gains or losses on them on a different basis
Or
• The liabilities are part of a group of ﬁn ancial liabilities, which are managed and their performance evaluated on a 
fair value basis, in accordance with a documented risk management or investment strategy
Or
• The liabilities contain one or more embedded derivatives, unless they do not signi ﬁc antly modify the cash flows that 
would otherwise be required by the contract, or it is clear with little or no analysis when a similar instrument is ﬁr st 
considered that separation of the embedded derivative(s) is prohibited.
Financial assets and ﬁn ancial liabilities at FVTPL are recorded in the statement of ﬁn ancial position at fair value. 
Changes in fair value are recorded in pro ﬁ t and loss with the exception of movements in fair value of liabilities 
designated at FVTPL due to changes in the Group’s own credit risk. Such changes in fair value are recorded in the Own 
credit reserve through OCI and do not get recycled to the pro ﬁ t or loss. Interest earned or incurred on instruments 
designated at FVTPL is accrued in interest income or interest expense, respectively, using the EIR, taking into account any discount/ premium and qualifying transaction costs being an integral part of instrument. Interest earned on assets mandatorily required to be measured at FVTPL is recorded using the contractual interest rate, as explained in 
Note 4.3.1. Dividend income from equity instruments measured at FVTPL is recorded in pro ﬁ t or loss as other operating 
income when the right to the payment has been established.
4.7.7  Financial guarantees, letters of credit and undrawn loan commitments
The Group issues ﬁn ancial guarantees, letters of credit and loan commitments.
Financial guarantees are initially recognised in the ﬁn ancial statements (within Provisions) at fair value, being the 
premium received. Subsequent to initial recognition, the Group’s liability under each guarantee is measured at the 
higher of the amount initially recognised less cumulative amortisation recognised in the income statement, and an ECL allowance.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 174
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.7  Financial assets and liabilities (cont’d)
4.7.7  Financial guarantees, letters of credit and undrawn loan commitments (cont’d)The premium received is recognised in the income statement in Net fees and commission income on a straight line 
basis over the life of the guarantee.
Undrawn loan commitments and letters of credits are commitments under which, over the duration of the commitment, 
the Bank is required to provide a loan with pre-speci ﬁe d terms to the customer. Similar to ﬁn ancial guarantee contracts, 
these contracts are in the scope of the ECL requirements.
The nominal contractual value of ﬁn ancial guarantees, letters of credit and undrawn loan commitments, where the 
loan agreed to be provided is on market terms, are not recorded on in the statement of ﬁn ancial position. 
The Group occasionally issues loan commitments at below market interest rates. Such commitments are subsequently 
measured at the higher of the amount of the ECL allowance (as explained in Note 4.10.1) and the amount initially recognised less, when appropriate, the cumulative amount of income recognised as outlined in Note 11.
4.8  Reclassification of financial assets and liabilities
The Group does not reclassify its ﬁn ancial assets subsequent to their initial recognition, apart from the exceptional 
circumstances in which the Group acquires, disposes of, or terminates a business line. Financial liabilities are never 
reclassi ﬁe d.
4.9  Derecognition of financial assets and liabilities
4.9.1 Derecognition due to substantial modification of terms and conditions
The Group derecognises a ﬁn ancial asset, such as a loan to a customer, when the terms and conditions have been 
renegotiated to the extent that, substantially, it becomes a new loan, with the difference recognised as a derecognition 
gain or loss, to the extent that an impairment loss has not already been recorded. The newly recognised loans are 
classi ﬁe d as Stage 1 for ECL measurement purposes, unless the new loan is deemed to be POCI.
When assessing whether or not to derecognise a loan to a customer, amongst others, the Group considers the following 
factors:
• Change in currency of the loan
• Introduction of an equity feature
• Change in counterparty
• If the modi ﬁc ation is such that the instrument would no longer meet the SPPI criterion
If the modi ﬁc ation does not result in cash flows that are substantially different, as set out below, the modi ﬁc ation does 
not result in de-recognition. Based on the change in cash flows discounted at the original EIR, the Group records a 
modi ﬁc ation gain or loss, to the extent that an impairment loss has not already been recorded. For ﬁn ancial liabilities, 
the Group considers a modi ﬁc ation substantial based on qualitative factors and if it results in a difference between 
the adjusted discounted present value and the original carrying amount of the ﬁn ancial liability of, or greater than, ten 
percent. For ﬁn ancial assets, this assessment is based on qualitative factors.
4.9.2  De-recognition other than for substantial modification
4.9.2.1  Financial assets
A ﬁn ancial asset (or, where applicable, a part of a ﬁn ancial asset or part of a group of similar ﬁn ancial assets) is 
derecognised when the rights to receive cash flows from the ﬁn ancial asset have expired. The Group also derecognises 
the ﬁn ancial asset if it has both transferred the ﬁn ancial asset and the transfer quali ﬁe s for de-recognition.
The Group has transferred the ﬁn ancial asset if, and only if, either:Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 175
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.9 Derecognition of financial assets and liabilities (cont’d)
4.9.2.1  Financial assets (cont’d)
• The Group has transferred its contractual rights to receive cash flows from the ﬁn ancial asset
Or• It retains the rights to the cash flows, but has assumed an obligation to pay the received cash flows in full without 
material delay to a third party under a ‘pass–through’ arrangement.
4.9.2  De-recognition other than for substantial modification
4.9.2.1  Financial assets
Pass-through arrangements are transactions whereby the Group retains the contractual rights to receive the cash 
flows of a ﬁn ancial asset (the ‘original asset’), but assumes a contractual obligation to pay those cash flows to one or 
more entities (the ‘eventual recipients’), when all of the following three conditions are met:
• The Group has no obligation to pay amounts to the eventual recipients unless it has collected equivalent amounts 
from the original asset, excluding short-term advances with the right to full recovery of the amount lent plus accrued interest at market rates;
• The Group cannot sell or pledge the original asset other than as security to the eventual recipients; and
• The Group has to remit any cash flows it collects on behalf of the eventual recipients without material delay. In addition, the Bank is not entitled to reinvest such cash flows, except for investments in cash or cash equivalents, including interest earned, during the period between the collection date and the date of required remittance to the 
eventual recipients.
A transfer only quali ﬁe s for derecognition if either:
• The Group has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset
Or
• The Group has neither transferred nor retained substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset, but has transferred control of the asset.
The Group considers control to be transferred if and only if, the transferee has the practical ability to sell the asset in its entirety to an unrelated third party and is able to exercise that ability unilaterally and without imposing additional 
restrictions on the transfer.
When the Group has neither transferred nor retained substantially all the risks and rewards and has retained control 
of the asset, the asset continues to be recognised only to the extent of the Group’s continuing involvement, in which case, the Group also recognises an associated liability. The transferred asset and the associated liability are measured on a basis that reflects the rights and obligations that the Group has retained.
Continuing involvement that takes the form of a guarantee over the transferred asset is measured at the lower of the 
original carrying amount of the asset and the maximum amount of consideration the Group could be required to pay.
If continuing involvement takes the form of a written or purchased option (or both) on the transferred asset, the 
continuing involvement is measured at the value the Group would be required to pay upon repurchase. In the case of a written put option on an asset that is measured at fair value, the extent of the entity’s continuing involvement is limited to the lower of the fair value of the transferred asset and the option exercise price.
4.9.2.2  Financial liabilities
A ﬁn ancial liability is derecognised when the obligation under the liability is discharged, cancelled or expires. Where 
an existing ﬁn ancial liability is replaced by another from the same lender on substantially different terms, or the terms 
of an existing liability are substantially modi ﬁe d, such an exchange or modi ﬁc ation is treated as a de-recognition of 
the original liability and the recognition of a new liability. The difference between the carrying value of the original 
ﬁn ancial liability and the consideration paid is recognised in pro ﬁt  or loss.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 176
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.10  Overview of the ECL principles
The Group records an allowance for expected credit loss for all loans and other debt ﬁn ancial assets not held at FVTPL, 
together with loan commitments and ﬁn ancial guarantee contracts, in this section all referred to as ‘ ﬁn ancial 
instruments’. Equity instruments are not subject to impairment under IFRS 9.
The ECL allowance is based on the credit losses expected to arise over the life of the asset (the lifetime expected credit 
losses or LTECL), unless there has been no signi ﬁc ant increase in credit risk since origination, in which case, the 
allowance is based on the 12 months’ expected credit losses (12m ECL) as outlined in Note 4.10.1). The Group’s policies 
for determining if there has been a signi ﬁc ant increase in credit risk are set out in Note 6.
The 12mECL is the portion of LTECLs that represent the ECL that result from default events on a ﬁn ancial instrument 
that are possible within the 12 months after the reporting date.Both LTECL and 12mECL are calculated on either an individual basis or a collective basis, depending on the nature of 
the underlying portfolio of ﬁn ancial instruments. The Bank’s policy for grouping ﬁn ancial assets measured on a 
collective basis is explained in Note 6.The Group has established a policy to perform an assessment, at the end of each reporting period, of whether a 
ﬁn ancial instrument’s credit risk has increased signi ﬁc antly since initial recognition, by considering the change in the 
risk of default occurring over the remaining life of the ﬁn ancial instrument. This is further explained in Note 6.
Based on the above process, the Group bands its loans into Stage 1, Stage 2, Stage 3 and POCI, as described below:
• Stage 1: When loans are ﬁr st recognised, the Bank recognises an allowance based on 12mECL. Stage 1 loans also 
include facilities where the credit risk has improved and the loan has been reclassi ﬁe d from Stage 2.
• Stage 2: When a loan has shown a signi ﬁc ant increase in credit risk since origination, the Bank records an allowance 
for the LTECL. Stage 2 loans also include facilities, where the credit risk has improved and the loan has been 
reclassi ﬁe d from Stage 3.
• Stage 3: Loans considered credit-impaired (as outlined in Note 6.) The Group records an allowance for the LTECL.
• POCI: Purchased or originated credit impaired (POCI) assets are ﬁn ancial assets that are credit impaired on initial 
recognition. POCI assets are recorded at fair value at original recognition and interest income is subsequently 
recognised based on a credit-adjusted EIR. The ECL allowance is only recognised or released to the extent that there is a subsequent change in the expected credit losses.
For ﬁn ancial assets for which the Bank has no reasonable expectations of recovering either the entire outstanding 
amount, or a proportion thereof, the gross carrying amount of the ﬁn ancial asset is reduced. This is considered a 
(partial) derecognition of the ﬁn ancial asset.
4.10.1  The calculation of ECL
The Group calculates ECL based on a four probability-weighted scenarios to measure the expected cash shortfalls, 
discounted at an approximation to the EIR. A cash shortfall is the difference between the cash flows that are due to an entity in accordance with the contract and the cash flows that the entity expects to receive.
The mechanics of the ECL calculations are outlined below and the key elements are, as follows:
• PD  T he Probability of Default  is an estimate of the likelihood of default over a given time horizon. A default may 
only happen at a certain time over the assessed period, if the facility has not been previously derecognised 
and is still in the portfolio. The concept of PD is further explained in Note 6.
 • EAD  T he Exposure at Default  is an estimate of the exposure at a future default date, taking into account expected 
changes in the exposure after the reporting date, including repayments of principal and interest, whether scheduled by contract or otherwise, expected drawdowns on committed facilities, and accrued interest from 
missed payments. The EAD is further explained in Note 6.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 177
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.10 Overview of the ECL principles (cont’d)
4.10.1 The calculation of ECL (cont’d)
• LGD  T he Loss Given Default  is an estimate of the loss arising in the case where a default occurs at a given time. It 
is based on the difference between the contractual cash flows due and those that the lender would expect to 
receive, including from the realisation of any collateral or credit enhancements that are integral to the loan 
and not required to be recognised separately, as set out in Note 4.4(vii). It is usually expressed as a percentage 
of the EAD. The LGD is further explained in Note 6.
When estimating the ECL, the Bank considers four scenarios (a base case, an upside, a mild downside (‘downside 1’) and a more extreme downside (‘downside 2’)). Each of these is associated with different PDs, EADs and LGDs. When relevant, the assessment of multiple scenarios also incorporates how defaulted loans are expected to be recovered, including the probability that the loans will cure and the value of collateral or the amount that might be received for 
selling the asset.
With the exception of other revolving facilities, for which the treatment is separately set out below , the maximum 
period for which the credit losses are determined is the contractual life of a ﬁn ancial instrument unless the Bank has 
the legal right to call it earlier.
Impairment losses and releases are accounted for and disclosed separately from modi ﬁc ation losses or gains that are 
accounted for as an adjustment of the ﬁn ancial asset’s gross carrying value.
Provisions for ECL for undrawn loan commitments are assessed. The calculation of ECL (including the ECL related to 
the undrawn element) of revolving facilities is explained below .
The mechanics of the ECL method are summarised below:
• Stage 1:  T he 12mECL is calculated as the portion of LTECL that represent the ECL that result from default 
events on a ﬁn ancial instrument that are possible within the 12 months after the reporting date. The 
Bank calculates the 12mECL allowance based on the expectation of a default occurring in the 12 months following the reporting date. These expected 12-month default probabilities are applied to a forecast EAD and multiplied by the expected LGD and discounted by an approximation to the original 
EIR. This calculation is made for each of the four scenarios, as explained above.
• Stage 2:  W hen a loan has shown a signi ﬁc ant increase in credit risk since origination, the Bank records an 
allowance for the LTECL. The mechanics are similar to those explained above, including the use of 
multiple scenarios, but PDs and LGDs are estimated over the lifetime of the instrument. The expected cash shortfalls are discounted by an approximation to the original EIR.
• Stage 3:  F or loans considered credit-impaired (as de ﬁn ed in Note 6), the Bank recognises the lifetime expected 
credit losses for these loans. The method is similar to that for Stage 2 assets, with the PD set at 100%.
• POCI:  P OCI assets are ﬁn ancial assets that are credit impaired on initial recognition. The Bank only 
recognises the cumulative changes in lifetime ECL since initial recognition, based on a probability-weighting of the four scenarios, discounted by the credit adjusted EIR.
• Loan commitment and letters of credit: When estimating LTECL for undrawn loan commitments, the Bank estimates the expected portion of the loan commitment that will be drawn down over its expected life. The ECL is then based on the present value of the expected shortfalls in cash flows if 
the loan is drawn down, based on a probability-weighting of the four scenarios. The expected cash 
shortfalls are discounted at an approximation to the expected EIR on the loan.
• For revolving facilities that include both a loan and an undrawn commitment, ECL is calculated and presented together with the loan. For loan commitments and letters of credit, the ECL is recognised within Provisions.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 178
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.10  Overview of the ECL principles (cont’d)
4.10.1  The calculation of ECL (cont’d)  
• Financial guarantee contracts: The Bank’s liability under each guarantee is measured at the higher of 
the amount initially recognised less cumulative amortisation recognised in the income statement, and the ECL provision. For this purpose, the Bank estimates ECL based on the present value of the 
expected payments to reimburse the holder for a credit loss that it incurs. The shortfalls are 
discounted by the risk-adjusted interest rate relevant to the exposure. The calculation is made using 
a probability-weighting of the four scenarios. The ECL related to ﬁn ancial guarantee contracts are 
recognised within Provisions .
4.10.2  Debt instruments measured at fair value through OCI
The ECL for debt instruments measured at FVTOCI do not reduce the carrying amount of these ﬁn ancial assets in the 
statement of ﬁn ancial position, which remains at fair value. Instead, an amount equal to the allowance that would arise 
if the assets were measured at amortised cost is recognised in OCI as an accumulated impairment amount, with a 
corresponding charge to pro ﬁ t or loss. The accumulated loss recognised in OCI is recycled to the pro ﬁ t and loss upon 
de-recognition of the assets.
4.10.3  Purchased or originated credit impaired financial assets (POCI)
For POCI ﬁn ancial assets, the Bank only recognises the cumulative changes in LTECL since initial recognition in the loss 
allowance.4.10.4  Forward looking information
In its ECL models, the Group relies on a broad range of forward looking information as economic inputs, such as:
• GDP growth
• Unemployment rates
• Central Bank base rates
• House price indices
The inputs and models used for calculating ECL may not always capture all characteristics of the market at the date of 
the ﬁn ancial statements. To reflect this, qualitative adjustments or overlays are occasionally made as temporary 
adjustments when such differences are signi ﬁc antly material. Detailed information about these inputs and sensitivity 
analysis are provided in Note 6.
4.11  Credit enhancements: collateral valuation and financial guarantees
To mitigate its credit risks on ﬁn ancial assets, the Group seeks to use collateral, where possible. The collateral comes 
in various forms, such as cash, securities, letters of credit/guarantees, real estate, receivables, inventories, other non-
ﬁn ancial assets and credit enhancements such as netting agreements. Collateral, unless repossessed, is not recorded 
on the Group’s statement of ﬁn ancial position.
Cash flows expected from credit enhancements which are not required to be recognised separately by IFRS standards 
and which are considered integral to the contractual terms of a debt instrument which is subject to ECL, are included in the measurement of those ECL. On this basis, the fair value of collateral affects the calculation of ECL. Collateral is 
generally assessed, at a minimum, at inception and re-assessed on a quarterly basis. However, some collateral, for 
example, cash or securities relating to margining requirements, is valued daily. 
To the extent possible, the Group uses active market data for valuing ﬁn ancial assets held as collateral. Other ﬁn ancial 
assets which do not have readily determinable market values are valued using models. Non- ﬁn ancial collateral, such 
as real estate, is valued based on data provided by third parties such as mortgage brokers, or based on housing price indices.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 179
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.11  Credit enhancements: collateral valuation and financial guarantees (cont’d)
Guarantees held are included in the measurement of loan ECLs when either they are speci ﬁe d in the contractual terms 
of the loan or else are integral to the loan, in that they formed part of the basis on which the loan was extended. 
Guarantees that are not integral to the loan’s contractual terms are accounted as separate units of accounts subject to 
ECL. Credit default swaps are not considered to be integral to a loan’s contractual terms and are accounted as derivative 
ﬁn ancial instruments, as set out in Note 4.7.2.
4.12  Collateral repossessed
The Group’s policy is to determine whether a repossessed asset can be best used for its internal operations or should 
be sold. Assets determined to be useful for the internal operations are transferred to their relevant asset category at the lower of their repossessed value or the carrying value of the original secured asset. Assets for which selling is 
determined to be a better option are transferred to assets held for sale at their fair value (if ﬁn ancial assets) and fair 
value less cost to sell for non- ﬁn ancial assets at the repossession date, in line with the Group’s policy.
In its normal course of business, the Group engages external agents to recover funds from the repossessed assets, generally at auction, to settle outstanding debt. Any surplus funds are returned to the customers/obligors. As a result of this practice, the residential properties under legal repossession processes are not recorded on the balance sheet.
4.13  Write-offs
Financial assets are written off either partially or in their entirety only when the Group has no reasonable expectation 
of recovering a ﬁn ancial asset in its entirety or a portion thereof. If the amount to be written off is greater than the 
accumulated loss allowance, the difference is ﬁr st treated as an addition to the allowance that is then applied against 
the gross carrying amount. Any subsequent recoveries are credited to credit loss expense.
4.14  Forborne and modified loans
The Group sometimes makes concessions or modi ﬁc ations to the original terms of loans as a response to the borrower’s 
ﬁn ancial difficulties, rather than taking possession or to otherwise enforce collection of collateral. The Group considers 
a loan forborne when such concessions or modi ﬁc ations are provided as a result of the borrower’s present or expected 
ﬁn ancial difficulties and the Group would not have agreed to them if the borrower had been ﬁn ancially healthy. 
Indicators of ﬁn ancial difficulties include defaults on covenants, or signi ﬁc ant concerns raised by the Credit Risk 
Department. Forbearance may involve extending the payment arrangements and the agreement of new loan 
conditions. Once the terms have been renegotiated, any impairment is measured using the original EIR as calculated 
before the modi ﬁc ation of terms. It is the Group’s policy to monitor forborne loans to help ensure that future payments 
continue to be likely to occur. De-recognition decisions and classi ﬁc ation between Stage 2 and Stage 3 are determined 
on a case-by-case basis. If these procedures identify a loss in relation to a loan, it is disclosed and managed as an impaired Stage 3 forborne asset until it is collected or written off.
When the loan has been renegotiated or modi ﬁe d but not derecognised, the Group also reassesses whether there has 
been a signi ﬁc ant increase in credit risk, as set out in Note 6. The Group also considers whether the assets should be 
classi ﬁe d as Stage 3. Once an asset has been classi ﬁe d as forborne, it will remain forborne for a minimum 24-month 
probation period. In order for the loan to be reclassi ﬁe d out of the forborne category, the customer has to meet all of 
the following criteria:
• All of its facilities have to be considered performing
• The probation period of two years has passed from the date the forborne contract was considered performing
• Regular payments of more than an insigni ﬁc ant amount of principal or interest have been made during at least half 
of the probation periodBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 180
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.14  Forborne and modified loans (cont’d)
• The customer does not have any contracts that are more than 30 days past due.
If modi ﬁc ations are substantial, the loan is derecognised, as explained in Note 4.9.1.
4.15  Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents in the Group statement of ﬁn ancial position and cash flow statement include notes and 
coins on hand, balances held with Bank of Ghana, other bank balances and highly liquid ﬁn ancial assets with original 
maturities of three months or less from the date of acquisition that are subject to an insigni ﬁc ant risk of changes in 
their fair value and are used by the Group in the management of its short-term commitments. 4.16  Repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase at a speci ﬁe d future date are not derecognised from the statement of 
ﬁn ancial position as the Group retains substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership. The corresponding cash 
received is recognised in the consolidated statement of ﬁn ancial position as an asset with a corresponding obligation 
to return it, including accrued interest as a liability within cash collateral on securities lent and repurchase agreements, 
reflecting the transaction’s economic substance as a loan to the Group. The difference between the sale and repurchase prices is treated as interest expense and is accrued over the life of agreement using the EIR. When the counterparty 
has the right to sell or re-pledge the securities, the Group reclassi ﬁe s those securities in its statement of ﬁn ancial 
position to ﬁn ancial assets held for trading pledged as collateral or to ﬁn ancial investments available-for-sale pledged 
as collateral, as appropriate.
Conversely, securities purchased under agreements to resell at a speci ﬁe d future date are not recognised in the 
statement of ﬁn ancial position. The consideration paid, including accrued interest, is recorded in the statement of 
ﬁn ancial position, within cash collateral on securities borrowed and reverse repurchase agreements, reflecting the 
transaction’s economic substance as a loan by the Group. The difference between the purchase and resale prices is recorded in net interest income and is accrued over the life of the agreement using the EIR.
If securities purchased under an agreement to resell are subsequently sold to third parties, the obligation to return the 
securities is recorded as a short sale within ﬁn ancial liabilities held for trading and measured at fair value with any 
gains or losses included in net trading income.
4.17  Securities lending and borrowing
Securities lending and borrowing transactions are usually collateralised by securities or cash. The transfer of the 
securities to counterparties is only reflected on the statement of ﬁn ancial position if the risks and rewards of ownership 
are also transferred. Cash advanced or received as collateral is recorded as an asset or liability.
Securities borrowed are not recognised in the statement of ﬁn ancial position, unless they are then sold to third 
parties, in which case, the obligation to return the securities is recorded as a short sale within ﬁn ancial liabilities held 
for trading and measured at fair value with any gains or losses included in net trading income.
4.18  Leases 
The Group assesses at contract inception whether a contract is, or contains, a lease. That is, if the contract conveys 
the right to control the use of an identi ﬁe d asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration.
4.18.1  The Group as a lesseeThe Group assesses whether a contract is or contains a lease, at inception of the contract. The Group recognises a 
right-of-use asset and a corresponding lease liability with respect to all lease arrangements in which it is the lessee, 
except for short-term leases (de ﬁn ed as leases with a lease term of 12 months or less) and leases of low value assets 
(such as tablets and personal computers, small items of office furniture and telephones). For these leases, the Group recognises the lease payments as an operating expense on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease unless Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 181
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.18 Leases (cont’d)
4.18.1  The Group as a lessee (cont’d)
another systematic basis is more representative of the time pattern in which economic bene ﬁ ts from the leased assets 
are consumed.The lease liability is initially measured at the present value of the lease payments that are not paid at the commencement 
date, discounted by using the rate implicit in the lease. If this rate cannot be readily determined, the Group uses its 
incremental borrowing rate.
Lease payments included in the measurement of the lease liability comprise:
• Fixed lease payments (including in-substance ﬁx ed payments), less any lease incentives receivable;
• Variable lease payments that depend on an index or rate, initially measured using the index or rate at the 
commencement date;
• The amount expected to be payable by the lessee under residual value guarantees;
• The exercise price of purchase options, if the lessee is reasonably certain to exercise the options; and
• Payments of penalties for terminating the lease, if the lease term reflects the exercise of an option to terminate 
the lease.
The lease liability is included in Other Liabilities in the consolidated statement of ﬁn ancial position.
The lease liability is subsequently measured by increasing the carrying amount to reflect interest on the lease liability 
(using the effective interest method) and by reducing the carrying amount to reflect the lease payments made.
The Group remeasures the lease liability (and makes a corresponding adjustment to the related right-of-use asset) 
whenever: 
• The lease term has changed or there is a signi ﬁc ant event or change in circumstances resulting in a change in the 
assessment of exercise of a purchase option, in which case the lease liability is remeasured by discounting the 
revised lease payments using a revised discount rate.
• The lease payments change due to changes in an index or rate or a change in expected payment under a guaranteed residual value, in which cases the lease liability is remeasured by discounting the revised lease payments using an unchanged discount rate (unless the lease payments change is due to a change in a floating interest rate, in which case a revised discount rate is used).
• A lease contract is modi ﬁe d and the lease modi ﬁc ation is not accounted for as a separate lease, in which case the 
lease liability is remeasured based on the lease term of the modi ﬁe d lease by discounting the revised lease 
payments using a revised discount rate at the effective date of the modi ﬁc ation.  
The Group did not make any such adjustments during the periods presented.
The right-of-use assets comprise the initial measurement of the corresponding lease liability, lease payments made at 
or before the commencement day, less any lease incentives received and any initial direct costs. They are subsequently measured at cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses. Whenever the Group incurs an obligation for costs to dismantle and remove a leased asset, restore the site on which it is located or restore the underlying asset to the condition required by the terms and conditions of the lease, a provision is recognised and measured under IAS 37. To the extent that the costs relate to a right-of use asset, the costs are included in the related right-of-use asset, unless 
those costs are incurred to produce inventories.
Right-of-use assets are depreciated over the shorter period of lease term and useful life of the right-of-use asset. If a 
lease transfers ownership of the underlying asset or the cost of the right-of-use asset reflects that the Group expects to exercise a purchase option, the related right-of-use asset is depreciated over the useful life of the underlying asset. The depreciation starts at the commencement date of the lease. 
The right-of-use assets are presented within Property and Equipment in the consolidated statement of ﬁn ancial 
position.
The Group applies IAS 36 to determine whether a right-of-use asset is impaired and accounts for any identi ﬁe d 
impairment loss as described in Note 4.21 Impairment of non- ﬁn ancial assets. Variable rents that do not depend on Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 182
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.18  Leases (cont’d)
4.18.1  The Group as a lessee (cont’d)an index or rate are not included in the measurement the lease liability and the right-of-use asset. The related payments 
are recognised as an expense in the period in which the event or condition that triggers those payments occurs and 
are included in the line “Other expenses” in pro ﬁ t or loss (see note 16). 
As a practical expedient, IFRS 16 permits a lessee not to separate non-lease components, and instead account for any lease and associated non-lease components as a single arrangement. The Group has not used this practical expedient. For a contract that contain a lease component and one or more additional lease or non-lease components, the Group 
allocates the consideration in the contract to each lease component on the basis of the relative stand-alone price of 
the lease component and the aggregate stand-alone price of the non-lease components.
4.18.2  The Group as a lessorThe Group enters into lease agreements as a lessor with respect to some of its investment properties.
Leases for which the Group is a lessor are classi ﬁe d as ﬁn ance or operating leases. Whenever the terms of the lease 
transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the lessee, the contract is classi ﬁe d as a ﬁn ance lease. 
All other leases are classi ﬁe d as operating leases. When the Group is an intermediate lessor, it accounts for the head 
lease and the sub-lease as two separate contracts. The sub-lease is classi ﬁe d as a ﬁn ance or operating lease by 
reference to the right-of-use asset arising from the head lease. 
Rental income from operating leases is recognised on a straight-line basis over the term of the relevant lease. Initial 
direct costs incurred in negotiating and arranging an operating lease are added to the carrying amount of the leased 
asset and recognised on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Amounts due from lessees under ﬁn ance leases are 
recognised as receivables at the amount of the Group’s net investment in the leases. Finance lease income is allocated to accounting periods so as to reflect a constant periodic rate of return on the Group’s net investment outstanding in respect of the leases. Subsequent to initial recognition, the Group regularly reviews the estimated unguaranteed 
residual value and applies the impairment requirements of IFRS 9, recognising an allowance for expected credit losses 
on the lease receivables.
Finance lease income is calculated with reference to the gross carrying amount of the lease receivables, except for 
credit-impaired ﬁn ancial assets for which interest income is calculated with reference to their amortised cost (i.e. after 
a deduction of the loss allowance). When a contract includes both lease and non-lease components, the Group applies 
IFRS 15 to allocate the consideration under the contract to each component.
4.19  Property and equipment 
Property and equipment are tangible items that are held for use in the production or supply of goods or services, for 
rental to others, or for administrative purposes and are expected to be used during more than one period. 
(i) Recognition and measurement
Items of property and equipment are measured at cost less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment 
losses. Cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the assets. Right-of-use assets are 
presented together with property and equipment in the statement of ﬁn ancial position – refer to the accounting policy 
in Note 4.18.
Purchased software that is integral to the functionality of the related equipment is capitalized as part of that equipment. 
When parts of an item of property or equipment have different useful lives, they are accounted for as separate items (major components) of property and equipment.
The cost of self-constructed assets includes the cost of materials and direct labour and any other costs directly 
attributable to bringing the asset to a working condition for its intended use.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 183
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.19 Property and equipment (cont’d)
(i) Recognition and measurement (cont’d)
Any gain or loss on disposal of an item of property and equipment (calculated as the difference between the net 
proceeds from disposal and the carrying amount of the item) is recognised within other income in pro ﬁ t or loss.
(ii) Subsequent costsThe cost of replacing part of an item of property or equipment is recognised in the carrying amount of the item if it is 
probable that future economic bene ﬁ ts embodied within the part will flow to the Company and its cost can be 
measured reliably. The costs of the day to day servicing of property and equipment are recognised in pro ﬁ t or loss as 
incurred.(iii) DepreciationDepreciation is the systematic allocation of the depreciable amount of an asset (i.e. the cost of the asset, or other 
amount substituted for cost, less its residual value) over its useful life.
Depreciation is recognised in pro ﬁ t or loss on a straight line basis over the estimated useful lives of each part of an 
item of property and equipment. Freehold Land is not depreciated.
The estimated useful lives for the current and comparative periods are as follows:
Computers 3 years
Motor vehicles 4 years
Furniture and equipment 3-4 years
Buildings 50 years
Depreciation methods, useful lives and residual values are reviewed at each reporting date and adjusted if appropriate.Right-of-use assets are depreciated over the shorter period of the lease term and the useful life of the underlying 
asset. If a lease transfers ownership of the underlying asset or the cost of the right-of-use asset reflects that the Group expects to exercise a purchase option, the related right-of-use asset is depreciated over the useful life of the underlying 
asset.
(iv) Capital work-in-progress
Property and equipment under construction is stated at initial cost and depreciated from the date the asset is made 
available for use over its estimated useful life. Assets are transferred from capital work in progress to an appropriate 
class of property and equipment when commissioned and ready for its intended use.
(v) Dual use property
Properties that are partly used for own use activities and partly for rental activities are considered dual use properties. 
This would result in the property being considered to be classi ﬁe d as part property and equipment and the other part 
as investment property. If a signi ﬁc ant portion of the property is used for own use and the portion rented out cannot 
be sold or leased out separately under a ﬁn ance lease, then the entire property is classi ﬁe d as property and equipment. 
The Group considers an own use portion above 95% of the measure as signi ﬁc ant.
(vi) Derecognition
Property and equipment are derecognised upon disposal or when no future economic bene ﬁ ts are expected to flow 
to the Group from either their use or disposal, if applicable. The gain or loss arising on the disposal or retirement of an 
asset is determined as the difference between the sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and is 
recognised in pro ﬁ t or loss.
4.20  Intangible assets
Intangible assets are the identi ﬁabl e non-monetary assets without physical substance.
Intangible assets comprise computer software licenses and customer relationship. Intangible assets acquired by the Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 184
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.20  Intangible assets (cont’d)
Group and have ﬁn ite useful lives are measured at cost less accumulated amortization and any accumulated impairment 
losses. 
Subsequent expenditure is capitalised only when it increases future economic bene ﬁ ts embodied in the speci ﬁc a sset 
to which it relates. All other expenditure is expensed as incurred.
Amortisation is calculated to write off the cost of intangible assets less their estimated residual values using the 
straightline method and recognised in pro ﬁ t or loss over its estimated useful life, from the date that it is available for 
use.The estimated useful life for the current and comparative periods are as follows:
Software    3  years
Customer Relationship   5  years
Amortization methods, useful lives and residual values are reviewed at each reporting date and adjusted, if appropriate.
An intangible asset is derecognised on disposal, or when no future economic bene ﬁ ts are expected from use or 
disposal. Gains or losses arising from derecognition of an intangible asset, measured as the difference between the net 
disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset, are recognised in pro ﬁ t or loss when the asset is derecognised.
4.21  Impairment of non-financial assets
The carrying amounts of the Group’s non- ﬁn ancial assets other than deferred tax assets are reviewed at each reporting 
date to determine whether there is any indication of impairment. If any such indication exists then the asset’s 
recoverable amount is estimated. An impairment loss is recognised if the carrying amount of an asset or its cash generating unit (CGU) exceeds its recoverable amount, unless the relevant asset is carried at a revalued amount, in 
which case the impairment loss is treated as a revaluation decrease and to the extent that the impairment loss is 
greater than the related revaluation surplus, the excess impairment loss is recognised in pro ﬁ t or loss.
The recoverable amount is the higher of its value in use and its fair value less costs of disposal. In assessing value in 
use, the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using pretax discount rates that reflect 
current market assessments of the time value of money and risks speci ﬁc t o the asset.
A previously recognised impairment loss is reversed where there has been a change in circumstances or in the basis of estimation used to determine the recoverable value, but only to the extent that the asset’s net carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount of the asset that would have been determined, net of depreciation or amortisation, 
if no impairment loss had been recognised. Any increase in excess of this amount is treated as a revaluation increase.
4.22 Employment benefits
(i) De ﬁne d contribution plans
Obligations for contributions to de ﬁne d contribution pension plans are recognised as personnel expenses in pro ﬁt  or 
loss in the period during which related services are rendered. The Group has the following de ﬁn ed contribution 
schemes:
Social Security and National Insurance Trust
Under the national pension scheme, the Bank contributes 13% of employees’ basic salary to the Social Security and 
National Insurance Trust (SSNIT) for employee pensions. The Group’s obligation is limited to the relevant contributions, 
which have been recognised in the ﬁn ancial statements. The pension liabilities and obligations, however, rest with 
SSNIT.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 185
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d4.22 Employment benefits (cont’d)
Provident Fund
The Group has a Provident Fund Scheme for all employees who have completed their probation period. Employees 
contribute 10% of their basic salary to the Fund whilst the Group contributes 12.5%. Obligations under the plan are 
limited to the relevant contributions which have been recognised in the ﬁn ancial statements and are settled on due 
dates to the Fund Manager.
(ii) De ﬁne d bene ﬁt  plans
The Group’s obligation in respect of de ﬁn ed bene ﬁ t plans is calculated separately for each plan by estimating the 
amount of future bene ﬁ ts that employees have earned in the current and prior periods, discounting that amount and 
deducting the fair value of any plan assets.
The calculation of de ﬁn ed bene ﬁ t obligations is performed annually by a Quali ﬁe d Actuary using the Projected Unit 
Credit Method. Remeasurements of the net de ﬁn ed bene ﬁ t liability, which comprise actuarial gains and losses is 
recognised immediately in other comprehensive income.
The Group determines the net interest expense (income) on the de ﬁn ed bene ﬁ t liability for the period by applying the 
discount rate used to measure the de ﬁn ed bene ﬁ t obligation at the beginning of the annual period to the de ﬁn ed 
bene ﬁ t liability at the period end, taking into account any changes in the de ﬁn ed bene ﬁ t liability during the period as 
a result of contributions and bene ﬁ t payments.
Net interest expense and other expenses related to de ﬁn ed bene ﬁ t plans are recognised in personnel expenses in 
proﬁ t or loss. When the bene ﬁ ts of a plan are changed or when a plan is curtailed, the resulting change in bene ﬁ ts 
that relate to past service or the gain or loss on curtailment is recognised immediately in pro ﬁ t or loss. The Group 
recognises gains and losses on the settlement of a de ﬁn ed bene ﬁ t plan when the settlement occurs.
The Group has the following de ﬁne d bene ﬁt  plans:
• Post-Retirement Medical Care
The Bank pays for post-retirement medical care of its staff.
• Pension Bene ﬁt s
The Group pays monthly pension bene ﬁ ts to retired employees, under a closed de ﬁn ed bene ﬁ t pension scheme. 
Under this scheme, bene ﬁc iaries are paid pensions equal to 60% of the net basic salaries of their serving counterparts. 
The scheme has been discontinued since 1985. At the reporting date, the scheme covered a closed Group of 257 (2019: 335) persons, who still receive monthly pensions. The monthly pensions are increased annually in line with adjustments to the basic salaries of their serving counterparts.
(iii) Other long term employee bene ﬁt s
The Company’s obligation in respect of long term employee bene ﬁ ts is the amount of future bene ﬁ ts that employees 
have earned in return for their services in the current and prior periods. That bene ﬁ t is discounted to determine its 
present value. Re-measurement are recognised in pro ﬁ t or loss in the period in which they arise. 
• Long service award
Long service awards accrue to employees based on graduated periods of uninterrupted service. These awards accrue 
over the service life of employees. Employees in service with the Group after ﬁf teen (15) years become eligible to 
receive cash payments at graduated rates when employees achieve stipulated milestones set by the Group.
 (iv) Termination bene ﬁt s
The Group recognises termination bene ﬁ ts when it is demonstrably committed to either terminating the employment 
of current employees according to a detailed formal plan; or providing termination bene ﬁ ts as a result of an offer 
made to encourage voluntary redundancy. If bene ﬁ ts are not expected to be wholly settled within 12 months of the 
reporting date, then they are discounted.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 186
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.22 Employment benefits (cont’d)
(v) Short term Employment bene ﬁ ts 
Short term employee bene ﬁ t obligations are measured on an undiscounted basis and are expensed as the related 
service is provided. A provision is recognised for the amount expected to be paid under short term cash bonus or 
proﬁ t sharing plans, if the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation to pay this amount as a result of past 
service provided by the employee and the obligation can be estimated reliably.4.23  Provisions and Contingent Liabilities
ProvisionsA provision is recognised if, as a result of a past event, the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation that 
can be estimated reliably, and it is probable that an outflow of the economic bene ﬁ ts will be required to settle the 
obligation. Provisions are not recognised for future operating losses.Provisions are measured at the present value of expenditures expected to be required to settle obligations using pre-
tax rates that reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and risks speci ﬁc t o the obligation. The 
unwinding of the discount is recognised as ﬁn ance cost. 
The expense relating to any provision is presented in the income statement net of any reimbursement in other 
operating expenses. When some or all of the economic bene ﬁ ts required to settle a provision are expected to be 
recovered from a third party, a receivable is recognised as an asset if it is virtually certain that reimbursement will be 
received and the amount of the receivable can be measured reliably. Detailed disclosures are provided in Note 38.
Contingent liabilities
A contingent liability is a possible obligation that arises from past events and whose existence will be con ﬁr med only 
by the occurrence or non-occurrence of one or more uncertain future events not wholly within the control of the 
Group, or a present obligation that arises from past events but is not recognised because it is not probable that an 
outflow of resources embodying economic bene ﬁ ts will be required to settle the obligation; or the amount of the 
obligation cannot be measured with sufficient reliability. If the likelihood of an outflow of resources is remote, the possible obligation is neither a provision nor a contingent liability and no disclosure is made.
4.24  Taxation
The income tax expense represents the sum of the tax currently payable and deferred tax.4.24.1. Current tax 
The tax currently payable is based on taxable pro ﬁ t for the year. Taxable pro ﬁ t differs from net pro ﬁ t as reported in 
proﬁ t or loss because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it 
further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible. The Group’s liability for current tax is calculated using tax 
rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the end of the reporting period.
A provision is recognised for those matters for which the tax determination is uncertain but it is considered probable 
that there will be a future outflow of funds to a tax authority. The provisions are measured at the best estimate of the 
amount expected to become payable. The assessment is based on the judgement of tax professionals within the 
Group supported by previous experience in respect of such activities and in certain cases based on specialist independent tax advice. 
Current tax assets and liabilities for the current and prior years are measured at the amount expected to be recovered 
from, or paid to, the taxation authorities. The tax rates and tax laws used to compute the amount are those that are enacted, or substantively enacted, by the reporting date in the countries where the Group operates and generates 
taxable income.
Current income tax relating to items recognised directly in equity or other comprehensive income is recognised in Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 187
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.24 Taxation (cont’d)
4.24.1. Current tax (cont’d) 
equity or other comprehensive income respectively and not in the statement of pro ﬁ t or loss. Management periodically 
evaluates positions taken in the tax returns with respect to situations in which applicable tax regulations are subject to 
interpretation and establishes provisions where appropriate. Detailed disclosures are provided in Note 19.
4.24.2. Deferred taxDeferred tax is provided on temporary differences at the reporting date between the tax bases of assets and liabilities 
and their carrying amounts for ﬁn ancial reporting purposes.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for all taxable temporary differences, except:
• Where the deferred tax liability arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or of an asset or liability in a transaction 
that is not a business combination and, at the time of the transaction, affects neither the accounting pro ﬁ t nor 
taxable pro ﬁt  or loss;
• In respect of taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiary and associates, where the 
timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary differences 
will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each reporting date and reduced to the extent that it is no 
longer probable that sufficient taxable pro ﬁ t will be available to allow all or part of the deferred tax asset to be utilised. 
Unrecognised deferred tax assets are reassessed at each reporting date and are recognised to the extent that it 
becomes probable that future taxable pro ﬁ t will allow the deferred tax asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the year when the asset 
is realised or the liability is settled, based on tax rates (and tax laws) that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date.
Current and deferred taxes are recognised as income tax bene ﬁ ts or expenses in the income statement except for tax 
related to the fair value re-measurement of debt instruments at fair value through OCI, foreign exchange differences and the net movement on cash flow hedges, which are charged or credited to OCI.
These exceptions are subsequently reclassi ﬁe d from OCI to the income statement together with the respective 
deferred loss or gain. The Group also recognises the tax consequences of payments and issuing costs, related to 
ﬁn ancial instruments that are classi ﬁe d as equity, directly in equity.
The Group only off-sets its deferred tax assets against liabilities when there is both a legal right to offset its current 
tax assets and liabilities and it is the Group’s intention to settle on a net basis.
4.24.3. Levies and similar chargesThe Group recognises the liability arising from levies and similar charges (such as National Stabilization Levy) when it 
becomes legally enforceable (i.e., when the obligating event arises) which is on 31 December each year.
4.25  Stated capital and reserves
(i) Share capital
The Group classi ﬁe s capital and equity instruments in accordance with the contractual terms of the instrument. 
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of ordinary shares, net of any tax effects are recognised as a 
deduction from equity.
(ii) Dividends
Dividends on ordinary shares are recognised in the period in which they are approved by the shareholders. Dividend 
proposed which is yet to be approved by shareholders, is disclosed by way of notes.
(iii) Statutory reserveStatutory reserve is based on the requirements of section 34(1) of the Banks and Specialized Deposit-Taking Institutions 
Act, 2016 (Act 930). Transfers into statutory reserve are made in accordance with the relationship Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 188
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d4. Summary of significant accounting policies (cont’d)
4.25  Stated capital and reserves (cont’d)
between the Bank’s reserve fund and it’s paid up capital, which determines the proportion of pro ﬁ ts for the period that 
should be transferred.
i. Where the reserve fund is less than ﬁf ty percent of the stated capital, then an amount not less than 50% of net 
proﬁ t for the year is transferred to the reserve fund.
ii. Where the reserve fund is more than 50% but less than 100% of the stated capital, then an amount not less 
than 25% of net pro ﬁ t is transferred to the reserve fund.
iii. Where the reserve is equal to or more than 100% of the stated capital, then an amount not less than 12.5% of 
the net pro ﬁ t for the year is transferred to the reserve fund.
(iv) C redit risk reserve
This is a reserve created to set aside the excess or shortfalls between amounts recognised as impairment loss on loans 
and advances based on provisions made for bad and doubtful loans and advances calculated in accordance with IFRS and the Central Bank’s prudential guidelines. See note 37iii.
4.26  Earnings per share
The Bank presents basic and diluted earnings per share (EPS) data for its ordinary shares. Basic EPS is calculated by 
dividing the pro ﬁ t or loss attributable to ordinary shareholders by the number of ordinary shares outstanding during 
the period. The Bank has no convertible notes and share options, which could potentially dilute its EPS and therefore 
the Bank’s Basic and diluted EPS are essentially the same.
4.27  Fiduciary assets
The Bank provides trust and other ﬁd uciary services that result in the holding or investing of assets on behalf of its 
clients. Assets held in a ﬁd uciary capacity, unless recognition criteria are met, are not reported in the ﬁn ancial 
statements, as they are not assets of the Bank.4.28  Segment reporting 
Segment results that are reported to the Group’s Managing Director (being the chief operating decision maker) include 
items that are directly attributable to a segment as well as those that can be allocated on a reasonable basis. Unallocated items comprise mainly corporate assets (primarily the Bank’s property and equipment), head office expenses and tax 
assets and liabilities.
The Group has four reportable segments: consumer banking, corporate banking, SME, and treasury which are the 
Group’s strategic operations. For each reportable segment, the Group’s Managing Director reviews internal management reports on the performance of each segment.
5.  Significant accounting judgements, estimates and assumptions
The preparation of the Group’s consolidated ﬁn ancial statements requires management to make judgements, estimates 
and assumptions that affect the reported amount of revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities, and the accompanying 
disclosures, as well as the disclosure of contingent liabilities. Uncertainty about these assumptions and estimates could result in outcomes that require a material adjustment to the carrying amount of assets or liabilities affected in 
future periods. In the process of applying the Group’s accounting policies, management has made the following 
judgements and assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty at the reporting 
date, that have a signi ﬁc ant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities 
within the next ﬁn ancial year. The estimates and associated assumptions are based on historical experience and other 
factors that are considered to be relevant. 
Existing circumstances and assumptions about future developments may change due to circumstances beyond the 
Group’s control and are reflected in the assumptions if and when they occur. Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 189
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d5. Significant accounting judgements, estimates and assumptions (cont’d)
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis. Revisions to accounting estimates are 
recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period, or in the period of the revision and future periods if the revision affects both current and future periods.
Items with the most signi ﬁc ant effect on the amounts recognised in the consolidated ﬁn ancial statements with 
substantial management judgement and/or estimates are collated below with respect to judgements/estimates involved.
5.1. Impairment losses on financial assets
The measurement of impairment losses under IFRS 9 across all categories of ﬁn ancial assets in scope requires some 
level of judgement. In particular, management makes its signi ﬁc ant judgement in the assessment of signi ﬁc ant 
increase in credit risk and default. As explained in note 4.10, ECL are measured as an allowance equal to 12-month ECL 
for stage 1 assets, or lifetime ECL for stage 2 or stage 3 assets. An asset moves to stage 3 when its credit risk has 
increased signi ﬁc antly and has met prede ﬁne d default criteria since initial recognition. The term “default” is not 
deﬁn ed in IFRS 9. In assessing whether an asset has met the prede ﬁn ed default criteria, the Group takes into account 
qualitative and quantitative reasonable and supportable forward-looking information.
5.2. Fair value of financial instruments
The fair value of ﬁn ancial instruments is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability 
in an orderly transaction in the principal (or most advantageous) market at the measurement date under current 
market conditions (i.e., an exit price) regardless of whether that price is directly observable or estimated using another 
valuation technique. When the fair values of ﬁn ancial assets and ﬁn ancial liabilities recorded in the statement of 
ﬁn ancial position cannot be derived from active markets, they are determined using a variety of valuation techniques 
that include the use of valuation models. The inputs to these models are taken from observable markets where possible, but where this is not feasible, estimation is required in establishing fair values. Judgements and estimates include considerations of liquidity and model inputs related to items such as credit risk (both own and counterparty), 
funding value adjustments, correlation and volatility.
For further details about determination of fair value, please see Note 4.6.
5.3. Provisions and other contingent liabilities
The Group operates in a regulatory and legal environment that, by nature, has a heightened element of litigation risk 
inherent to its operations. As a result, it is involved in various litigation, arbitration and regulatory investigations and 
proceedings arising in the ordinary course of the Group’s business.
When the Group can reliably measure the outflow of economic bene ﬁ ts in relation to a speci ﬁc case and considers 
such outflows to be probable, the Group records a provision against the case. Where the probability of outflow is considered to be remote, or probable, but a reliable estimate cannot be made, a contingent liability is disclosed. However, when the Group is of the opinion that disclosing these estimates on a case-by-case basis would prejudice 
their outcome, then the Bank does not include detailed, case-speci ﬁc d isclosers in its ﬁn ancial statements.
Given the subjectivity and uncertainty of determining the probability and amount of losses, the Group takes into account a number of factors including legal advice, the stage of the matter and historical evidence from similar 
incidents. Signi ﬁc ant judgement is required to conclude on these estimates.
For further details on provisions and other contingencies, see Notes 4.23, 34 and 38.
5.4  Determination of Lease Term for lease contracts with renewable and termination options               
(the Group as a lessee)
The Group determines the lease term as the non-cancellable term of the lease, together with any periods covered by 
an option to extend the lease if it is reasonably certain to be exercised, or any periods covered by an option to 
terminate the lease, if it is reasonably certain not to be exercised.
The Group has several lease contracts that include extension and termination options. The Group applies judgement 
in evaluating whether it is reasonably certain whether or not to exercise the option to renew or terminate the lease. Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 190
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d5.  Significant accounting judgements, estimates and assumptions (cont’d)
5.4  Determination of Lease Term for lease contracts with renewable and termination options               
(the Group as a lessee) (cont’d)
That is, it considers all relevant factors that create an economic incentive for it to exercise either the renewal or 
termination. After the commencement date, the Group reassesses the lease term if there is a signi ﬁc ant event or 
change in circumstances that is within its control that affects its ability to exercise or not to exercise the option to 
renew or to terminate (e.g., construction of signi ﬁc ant leasehold improvements or signi ﬁc ant customisation of the 
leased asset).
5.5  Estimating the Incremental borrowing rate
The Group cannot readily determine the interest rate implicit in the lease, therefore, it uses its incremental borrowing 
rate (IBR) to measure lease liabilities. The IBR is the rate of interest that the Group would have to pay to borrow over 
a similar term, and with a similar security, the funds necessary to obtain an asset of a similar value to the right-of-use 
asset in a similar economic environment. The IBR therefore reflects what the Group ‘would have to pay’, which requires 
estimation when no observable rates are available (such as for subsidiaries that do not enter into ﬁn ancing transactions) 
or when they need to be adjusted to reflect the terms and conditions of the lease (for example, when leases are not in the subsidiary’s functional currency).The Bank estimates the IBR using observable inputs (such as market interest 
rates) when available and is required to make certain entity-speci ﬁc a djustments (such as the subsidiary’s stand-alone 
credit rating, or to reflect the terms and conditions of the lease).
6. Financial risk management
Effective risk management is of critical importance and key to the delivery of sustainable returns for shareholders. Risk 
taking is an inherent part of the Group’s business activities and is de ﬁn ed as the possibility of losing some or all of an 
original investment. Risk management systems and governance structures are designed to reduce earnings volatility 
and achieve an appropriate balance between risk and reward and increased pro ﬁt ability. 
Current changes to regulations in the banking sector reinforce the Group’s commitment to embed an enhanced risk 
based culture throughout the Group. Risk policies and procedures are regularly reviewed to reflect these changes as well as best practices in the market. The Group has upgraded its risk infrastructure to enhance effective management 
and also to meet future regulatory demands.
Risk Management Framework 
The risk management framework consists of a comprehensive set of policies, standards, procedures and processes 
designed to identify, measure, monitor, mitigate and report signi ﬁc ant risk exposure in a consistent and effective 
manner across the Bank. Through the framework, risk is managed at enterprise-wide level, with the objective of 
maximizing risk-adjusted returns within the context of the Bank’s risk appetite.
The most important types of risk are credit risk, liquidity risk, market risk and operational risk. 
• Credit risk reflects the possible inability of a customer to meet his/her repayment or delivery obligations. 
• Market risk, which includes foreign currency risk, interest rate risk and equity price risk, is the risk of fluctuation 
in asset and commodity values caused by changes in market prices and yields. 
• Liquidity risk results in the inability to accommodate liability maturities and withdrawals, fund asset growth or otherwise meet contractual obligations at reasonable market rates. 
• Operational risk is the potential loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, systems, people, legal issues, external events and non-compliance with regulatory issues.
The Board of Directors have overall responsibility for the establishment and oversight of the Bank’s risk management framework. The Board’s commitment to good risk management is supported by their continuing professional 
development in the ﬁe ld of risk management and their support for the implementation and continued improvement 
of the risk management framework within the Group. 
The Board’s Risk and Capital Management Committee is responsible for monitoring risk positions which the Group Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 191
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
Risk Management Framework (cont’d)
holds in the normal course of business as well as those risks that the Group may take in alignment with approved limits 
and controls. The Committee also reviews the adequacy of the risk management framework in relation to risks faced 
by the Bank on an ongoing basis. The Committee is assisted in its functions by a risk management structure, which 
ensures consistent assessment of risk management controls and procedures. 
The Board Audit Committee is responsible for reviewing the Group’s accounting policies, the contents of ﬁn ancial 
reports, disclosure controls and procedures, management’s approach to internal controls, the adequacy and scope of 
the external and internal audit functions, compliance with regulatory and ﬁn ancial reporting requirements, overseeing 
relationships with the Bank’s external auditors and providing assurance to the Board that executive management’s 
control assurance process are complete and effective. It also has responsibility for Compliance & Anti-Money Laundering. 
The Credit Committee is the highest management level authority on all counterparty risk exposures. It oversees control 
and management of all policies, processes and procedures relating to the Bank’s lending function. The scope of risks 
covered by this Committee includes Credit Risk, Concentration Risk and Country & Cross Border Risk. 
The Operational Risk and Control Committee is an Executive Management Committee with responsibility for monitoring 
and managing the level of operational risk exposures within the Bank as well as overseeing the control and management 
of all policies, processes and procedures relating to the Bank’s Operational Risk function. 
Asset and Liability Committee (ALCO) is a Management Committee which is a decision making body for developing 
policies relating to all asset and liability management (ALM) matters. 
The Risk Management Department (RMD) is responsible for developing and monitoring the Group’s risk management 
policies and procedures over speci ﬁe d areas on a day-to-day basis. It reports regularly to the Board on its activities 
through the Executive Management Committee. Policies and procedures have been established to identify and analyze 
risks faced by the Bank and put appropriate controls in place to monitor adherence to these policies. These are reviewed regularly to reflect changes in market conditions, products and services offered. 
Functional units or divisions are accountable for executing speci ﬁc a spects of the Group’s activities. Authority is 
delegated to the Head of each functional unit by the Managing Director. The Head of each function in turn delegates 
responsibility to individual staff for carrying out speci ﬁc t asks in accordance with delegated authorities and within the 
procedural disciplines of the Group. 
Functions are organized in accordance with the “Three Lines of Defence” governance model. The three lines of defence 
are constituted as follows:
o The ﬁr st line of defence consists of functional units that are responsible for actual activities of the business and 
are responsible for managing their own risks. 
o The second line of defence consists of functional units that are responsible for monitoring activities of the ﬁr st 
line of defence and exercising risk control. The second line functions of the Bank are Governance, Risk, 
Compliance and Control, Product Control and Performance Monitoring. 
o The third line of defence consists of functional units that are responsible for reviewing the activities of line 1 and 
2 functions at appropriate frequencies, assessing the robustness of control and mandating corrective action or improvement where necessary. Risk Assurance services are provided to the Bank by the Internal Audit function.
Risk Appetite
Risk appetite is an expression of the amount of risk the Group is willing to take in pursuit of its strategic objectives, 
reflecting capacity to sustain losses and continue to meet obligations arising from a range of different stress conditions. 
This is used to maximize returns without exposing the Group to levels of risk above its appetite. In particular, the risk 
appetite framework assists in protecting ﬁn ancial performance and improves management’s responsiveness. It also 
improves control and co-ordination of risk-taking across business units and identi ﬁe s unused risk capacity in pursuit of 
proﬁt able opportunities. Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 192
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
Risk Appetite (cont’d)
The Bank’s risk appetite statement is under review by the Board and will form the basis for establishing the risk 
parameters within which business units must operate, including policies, concentration limits and business mix.
Credit Risk Management
Credit risk is the potential for ﬁn ancial loss due to the failure of counterparties to meet obligations to pay the Bank in 
accordance with agreed terms. Credit risk is the most important risk for the Group’s business. 
Management carefully manages its exposure to credit risk. Credit risk is attributed to both on-balance sheet ﬁn ancial 
instruments such as loans, overdrafts, cash held with other ﬁn ancial institutions, debt securities and other bills, 
investments, and acceptances and credit equivalent amounts related to off -balance sheet ﬁn ancial items. The Bank’s 
approach to credit risk management preserves the independence and integrity of risk assessment, while being 
integrated into business management processes. Credit risk is managed through a framework that sets out policies 
and procedures covering the identi ﬁc ation, measurement and management of credit risk. The goal of credit risk 
management is to evaluate and manage credit risk in order to further enhance a strong credit culture.
Credit Concentration Risk
Credit concentration risk is the risk of loss to the Group arising from excessive concentration of exposure to a single 
counterparty, industry sector, product or geographic area. Large exposure limits have been established under the 
Group’s credit policy in order to avoid excessive losses from any single counter-party who is unable to ful ﬁl i ts payment 
obligations. These risks are monitored on an ongoing basis and subject to annual or more frequent reviews when considered necessary.
Credit Mitigation
Potential credit losses from any given account, customer or portfolio are mitigated using a range of tools such as 
collateral, credit insurance and other guarantees. The reliance that can be placed on these mitigants is carefully assessed in the light of issues such as legal certainty and enforceability, market valuation and counterparty risk of the guarantor. Risk mitigation policies determine the eligibility of collateral types.
Collateral
In order to proactively respond to credit deterioration, the Group employs a range of policies and practices to mitigate 
credit risk. The most traditional of these is the taking of security for funds advanced, which is common practice. Collateral is held to mitigate credit risk exposures. Collateral types that are eligible for risk mitigation include: cash; residential, commercial and industrial property; property and equipment such as motor vehicles, plant and machinery, bank guarantees and floating charge over other assets. 
The risk mitigation policy prescribes the frequency of valuation for different collateral types, based on the level of price 
volatility of each type of collateral and the nature of the underlying product or risk exposure. Where appropriate, 
collateral values are adjusted to reflect current market conditions. Longer-term ﬁn ance and lending to corporate entities 
are generally secured; individual credit facilities are generally unsecured. In addition, in order to minimize credit losses, 
the Group seeks additional collateral from counterparties as soon as impairment indicators are noticed for relevant individual loans and advances. 
Credit Related Commitments
Documentary and commercial letters of credit are written undertakings by the Group on behalf of a customer 
authorizing a third party to draw drafts on the Group up to a stipulated amount under speci ﬁc t erms and conditions. 
The primary purpose of these instruments is to ensure that funds are available to a customer as required. Guarantees and standby letters of credit carry less risk than direct loans. These arrangements are collateralized by the 
underlying shipments of goods. The likelihood of loss amounts is far less than the entire commitment as most 
commitments to extend credit of this nature are contingent upon the customer maintaining speci ﬁc c ash in margin 
accounts. The Group monitors the term to maturity of credit commitments because longer-term commitments generally 
have a greater degree of credit risk than shorter-term commitments.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 193
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
Impairment
Under IFRS 9 standard, Banks are required to record an allowance for expected losses for all loans and other debt 
ﬁn ancial assets at amortised costs, loan commitments and ﬁn ancial guarantee contracts. The allowance is based on 
the expected credit losses associated with the probability of default in the next twelve months unless there has been 
a signi ﬁc ant increase in credit risk since origination, in which case, the allowance is based on the probability of default 
over the life of the asset. 
The measurement of expected credit losses is primarily based on the product of the instrument’s probability of default 
(PD), loss given default (LGD), and exposure at default (EAD), discounted to the reporting date using the effective interest rate; 
• Probability of default (PD):  This is the probability that an obligor or counterparty will default over a given period, 
usually one year.
• Loss given default (LGD):  LGD is de ﬁn ed as the portion of the loan determined to be irrecoverable at the time of 
loan default (1 – recovery rate).
• Exposure at default (EAD): This represents the amount that is outstanding at the point of default. Its estimation includes the drawn amount and expected utilization of the undrawn commitment at default.
IFRS 9 Model
The IFRS 9 model has been built based on segmentation using business lines to reflect appropriate level of granularity 
based on business types. 
• The Corporate model was segmented based on industry sectors which depict similar risk pro ﬁl e and characteristics. 
• The Retail model was based on homogenous pool of cluster using product lines.
• The Investment model, mainly based on interbank placement, was also segmented into secured and unsecured products. The Treasury Bills and Government Bonds were zero risk weighted therefore attracted nil Expected Credit Loss. 
• The Off-Balance sheet items were modelled via Credit Conversion Factor (CCF) principle based on BoG Capital Requirement Directive.  The risk factor was applied to the off-balance sheet item to arrive at the credit equivalent amount of the exposure. Similarly, for contractual limits, the undrawn commitments CCF was modelled and applied 
to the undrawn portion to estimate the potential risk exposure. 
Impairment of loans is recognised on an individual or collective basis – in three stages under IFRS 9.
Stage 1 – When a loan is originated or purchased, ECLs resulting from default events that are possible within the next 
12 months are recognised and a loss allowance is established.  On subsequent reporting dates, 12-month ECL also 
applies to existing loans with no signi ﬁc ant increase in credit risk since their initial recognition. Interest revenue is 
calculated on the loan’s gross carrying amount.
Stage 2 – If a loan’s credit risk has increased signi ﬁc antly since initial recognition and is not considered low, lifetime 
ECLs are recognised. The calculation of interest revenue is the same as for Stage 1. 
Stage 3 – If the loan’s credit risk increases to the point where it is considered credit-impaired, interest revenue is 
calculated based on the loan’s amortised cost that is, the gross carrying amount less the loss allowance. Lifetime ECLs are recognised, as in Stage 2.
The ECL model incorporated forward looking information including reasonable and supportable forecasts of future 
economic conditions. Future cash flows and risk of default were also considered. The Bank considered three different scenarios for the model to mitigate non-linearity in the portfolio. The base, optimistic and pessimistic scenarios of macroeconomic conditions were used in estimating the probability of default. This was to ensure that the impairment estimates were not biased due to cyclicality of economic conditions. Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 194
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
Early Alerts 
Corporate Banking, Consumer Banking and Small and Medium Scale Enterprise (SME) accounts are placed on early 
alert status when they display signs of weakness. Such accounts and portfolios are subject to a dedicated process of 
oversight involving Senior Risk Officers and Remedial Officers in the Loans Recovery Unit. The approach to Early Alerts monitoring include but not limited to: 
• Deterioration of the customer’s ﬁn ancial position;
• Delays by customers in settling their obligations; 
• Overdraft balances exceeding approved limits; and 
• Clear indications of the customer not being able to settle commitments on due dates. 
Customer payment plans are re-evaluated and remedial actions agreed and monitored until delinquency situations are resolved. Remedial actions include, but are not limited to, exposure reduction, security enhancement and movement of the account to the Loans Recovery Unit. 
Write off policy 
The Bank writes off loans and advances balance (and any related allowances for impairment losses) when the Bank’s 
Credit Risk Management determines that the loans and advances are uncollectible. This determination is reached after 
considering information such as the occurrence of signi ﬁc ant changes in the borrower’s ﬁn ancial position such that the 
borrower can no longer discharge the obligation, or that proceeds from collateral will not be sufficient to pay back the 
entire exposure. For smaller balance standardised loans, charge off decisions generally are based on a product speci ﬁc 
past due status. Related and connected lending is not permitted to be written off unless with the approval of the Bank of Ghana and the Board of Directors.
Impairment 
An account is considered to be in default when payment is not received on due date. Accounts that are overdue by 
more than 90 days are considered delinquent. These accounts are closely monitored and subjected to a collection process. The process used for impairment is based on Bank of Ghana guidelines which recognise cash as a credit mitigant. Individual impairments are made for outstanding amounts depending on the number of days past due with full impairment made after 360 days. In certain situations such as bankruptcy, fraud and death, the loss recognition 
process is accelerated. Loans and advances less than 90 days past due are generally not considered impaired unless 
other information is available to indicate otherwise. 
The Bank of Ghana Guideline is as set out below:
Grade Description Number of days Impairment (%)
Current Less than 30 days 1
Other Loans Exceptionally Mentioned (OLEM) 30 to less than 90 days 10
Substandard 90 to less than 180 25
Doubtful 180 to less than 360 days 50
Loss 360 days and above 100
Credit quality
The Bank monitors credit risk per class of ﬁn ancial instrument. The table below outlines the classes identi ﬁe d, as well 
as the ﬁn ancial statement line item and the note that provides an analysis of the items included in the ﬁn ancial 
statement:
Loans and advances to banks at amortised cost Loans and advances to banks 26
Debt investment securities at amortised Cost Investment securities 27
Debt investment securities at FVTOCI Investment securities 27Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 195
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’dClass of financial instrument Financial statement line Note
Other assets Other assets 32
Loan commitments and ﬁn ancial guarantee contracts Provisions 34
An analysis of the Bank’s credit risk concentrations per class of ﬁn ancial asset is provided in the following tables. 
Unless speci ﬁc ally indicated, for ﬁn ancial assets, the amounts in the table represent gross carrying amounts. For loan 
commitments and ﬁn ancial guarantee contracts, the amounts in the table represent the amounts committed or 
guaranteed, respectively.
Loans and advances to customers at amortised cost
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Retail: Dec-20 D e c-1 9
Personal Loan  1,122,774  968,031 
Corporate Employee Scheme  175,303  146,839 
SME  24,194  58,817 
Staff Loan  118,182  100,316 
Corporate:   
Agriculture, forestry & ﬁs hing  40,690  55,657 
Commerce & ﬁnance  850,780  741,549 
Construction  126,643  129,872 
Loans and advances to customers at amortised cost
Retail:
Electricity, gas & water  152,494  - 
Manufacturing  323,436  246,226 
Mining & quarrying  96,124  140,174 
Services  1,111,359  1,332,159 
Transport, storage & communication  68,574  41,390 
Total 4,210,553 3,961,030
Concentration by region
Europe - -
America - -
Middle East and Africa 4,210,553 3,961,030
Asia - -
Total 4,210,553 3,961,030
Investment
Concentration by Type
Sovereign  8,575,901  5,996,593 
Banking  189,031  217,481 
Total 8,764,932 6,214,074
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis6. Financial risk management (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 196
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’dConcentration by region            Dec-20 D e c-1 9
Europe - 12,423
Middle East and Africa 8,764,932 6,201,651
Total 8,764,932 6,214,074
An analysis of the Bank’s credit risk exposure per class of ﬁn ancial asset, internal rating and “stage” without taking into 
account the effects of any collateral or other credit enhancements is provided in the following tables. Unless speci ﬁc ally 
indicated, for ﬁn ancial assets, the amounts in the table represent gross carrying amounts. For loan commitments and 
ﬁn ancial guarantee contracts, the amounts in the table represent the amounts committed or guaranteed, respectively.
Loans and Advances to 
Customers at Amortised costs Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3 2020 2019 
On Balance sheet  12-month ECL  Lifetime ECL  Lifetime ECL  POCI  Total  Total 
 Grades 1-3: Low to fair risk  3,140,121 463,500 56,894 - 3,660,515  3,473,600 
 Grades 4-6 Monitoring - 73,348 11,200 -  84,548 249,418 
 Grades 7-8: Substandard  -  - 149,354 -  149,354  42,571 
 Grade 9: Doubtful  -  - 89,539 -  89,539  26,835 
 Grade 10: Impaired  -  - 226,597 -  226,597 168,606 
 Total gross carr ying amount 3,140,121 536,848 533,584 - 4,210,553 3,961,030 
 Loss allowance  76,830  111,414 387,679 -  575,923  335,103 
Interbank Placement
 Grades 1-3: Low to fair risk  189,031  -  - - 189,031  78,827 
 Grades 4-6 Monitoring  -  -  - - - 189,031 
 Grades 7-8: Substandard  -  -  - - - - 
 Grade 9: Doubtful  -  -  - - - - 
 Grade 10: Impaired  -  -  - - - - 
 Total gross carrying amount 189,031 -  - - 189,031  267,858 
 Loss allowance 2,926 -  - -  2,926  7,867 
Off Balance sheet Grades 1-3: Low to fair risk 695,713  1,569 1,052 -  698,334 822,976 
 Grades 4-6 Monitoring  -  -  - - -  41,304 
 Grades 7-8: Substandard  -  -  - 
- - - 
 Grade 9: Doubtful  -  -  - - - - 
 Grade 10: Impaired  -  -  - - - - 
 Total gross carrying amount  695,713 1,569  1,052 -  698,334  864,280 
 Loss allowance  21,034  243 765 -  22,042  38,275 
This table summarises the loss allowance as of the year end by class of exposure/asset.
6. Financial risk management (cont’d)6. Financial risk management (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 197
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’dFigures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Class of exposure/asset 2020 2019 
 Loss allowance    
 Loans and advances to customers at amortised cost 575,923 335,103 
 Debt investment securities at amortised cost - - 
 Inter bank Placements 2,926 7,867 
 Off balance sheet 22,042 38,275 
 Total 600,891 381,245 
The Bank did not recognise any other class of Purchased or Originally Credit Impaired (POCI) ﬁn ancial assets during 
the period. More information about the signi ﬁc ant changes in the gross carrying amount of ﬁn ancial assets during the 
period that contributed to changes in the loss allowance is provide d in the table below:
Loans and advances to customers at Amortised Cost  Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3    
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
 Gross carrying amount as at 01/01/2020 3,075,971  642,155 242,904  - 3,961,030 
 Changes in the gross carrying amount  -  -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 1  299,410  (296,279) (3,131)  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 2  (45,516)  45,871  (355)  -  - 
 ––Transfer to stage 3  (82,705)  (99,088) 181,793  - - 
Loans and advances to customers at Amortised Cost    
 ––Changes due to modi ﬁcations that did not result in 
derecognition - -  -  - - 
 New ﬁn ancial assets originated or purchased  943,708  41,425 17,755  - 1,002,888 
 Financial assets that have been derecognised (875,886)  (5,629) (28,919)  - (910,434)
 Write off - -  -  - - 
 Other changes (174,861)  208,393 123,537  - 157,069
 Gross carrying amount as at 31/12/2020 3,140,121  536,848 533,584  - 4,210,553 
 Loss allowance as at 31/12/2020  76,830  111,414 387,679  -  575,923 
Loss allowance – Interbank placement at amortised cost
 Loss allowance as at 01/01/2020  8  7,858  -  - 7,866 
  - -  -  - - 
 Changes in the loss allowance  -  -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 1  7,858  (7,858)  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 2 - -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 3 - -  -  - - 
 ––Increases due to change in credit risk - -  -  - - 
 Decreases due to change in credit risk  (7,858) -  -  -  (7,858)
 Write-offs - -  -  - - 
 Changes due to modi ﬁcations that did - -  -  - - 
 not result in derecognition - -  -  - - Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 198
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’dFigures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Loss allowance – Interbank placement at amortised cost  Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3 
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
 New ﬁn ancial assets originated or purchased  2,926 -  -  - 2,926 
 Financial assets that have been derecognised (8) -  -  -  (8)
 Changes in models/risk parameters - -  -  - - 
 Foreign exchange and other movements - -  -  - - 
 Loss allowance as at 31/12/2020  2,926 -  -  - 2,926 
Loss allowance – Off Balance Sheet
Loss allowance as at 01/01/2020  27,101  10,819  355  -  38,275 
 Changes in the loss allowance  -  -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 1 - -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 2  -  -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 3 - -  -  - - 
 ––Increases due to change in credit risk 359 -  -  -  359 
 Decreases due to change in credit risk - -  -  - -
 Write-offs - -  -  - - 
 Changes due to modi ﬁcations that did - -  -  - - 
 not result in derecognition - -  -  - - 
 New ﬁn ancial assets originated or purchased  18,834 236  760  -  19,830 
 Financial assets that have been derecognised  (25,433)  (10,819)  (355)  - (36,607)
 Changes in models/risk parameters - -  -  - - 
 Foreign exchange and other movements 173  7 5  -  185 
 Loss allowance as at 31/12/2020  21,034 243  765  -  22,042 
Loss allowance – Loans and Advances at amortised cost Loss allowance as at 01/01/2020  76,219  81,902 176,981  -  335,102 
 Changes in the loss allowance  -  -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 1  47,678  (45,491) (2,187)  -   -  
 ––Transfer to stage 2 (996)  1,238  (242)  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 3  (2,212)  (22,020) 24,232  - - 
 ––Increases due to change in credit risk  12,366  92,297 204,126  -  308,789 
 Decreases due to change in credit risk  (62,598) (341)  (157,758)  -  (220,697)
 Write-offs - -  -  - - 
 Changes due to modi ﬁcations that did - -  -  - - 
 not result in derecognition - -  -  - - 
 New ﬁn ancial assets originated or purchased  25,780  14,684 12,774  -  53,238 
 Financial assets that have been derecognised  (28,596)  (1,272) (20,549)  -  (50,417)6. Financial risk management (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 199
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’dFigures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Loss allowance – Loans and Advances at amortised cost  Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3    
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
 Changes in models/risk parameters - -  -  - - 
 Foreign exchange and other movements  9,189  (9,583) 150,302  -  149,908 
 Loss allowance as at 31/12/2020  76,830  111,414 387,679  -  575,923
Interbank Placements at Amortised Cost
 Gross carrying amount as at 01/01/2020  78,827  189,031  -  -  267,858 
 Changes in the gross carrying amount 
 ––Transfer to stage 1  189,031  (189,031)  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 2 - -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 3 - -  -  - - 
 ––Changes due to modi ﬁcations that did not result in 
derecognition - -  -  - - 
 New ﬁn ancial assets originated or purchased 12,813,592 -  -  - 12,813,592 
 Financial assets that have been derecognised (4,960,486) -  -  - (4,960,486)
 Write off - -  -  - - 
 Other changes  643,213 -  -  -  643,213 
 Gross carrying amount as at 31/12/2020 8,764,177 -  -  - 8,764,177 
 Loss allowance as at 31/12/2020  2,926 -  -  - 2,926 
Off Balance Sheet
 Gross carrying amount as at 01/01/2020  787,977  75,814  488  -  864,279 
 Changes in the gross carrying amount  -  -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 1 - -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 2 - -  -  - - 
 ––Transfer to stage 3 - -  -  - - 
 ––Changes due to modi ﬁcations that did not result in 
derecognition - -  -  - - 
 New ﬁn ancial assets originated or purchased  638,135  1,569 1,052  -  640,756 
 Financial assets that have been derecognised  (734,519)  (75,814)  (488)  -  (810,821)
 Write off - -  -  - - 
 Other changes  4,120 - -  - 4,120 
 Gross carrying amount as at 31/12/2020  695,713  1,569 1,052  -  698,334 
 Loss allowance as at 31/12/2020  21,034 243  765  -  22,042 
Collateral held as security and other credit enhancements  
The Bank holds collateral or other credit enhancements to mitigate credit risk associated with ﬁn ancial assets. The 
Bank did not hold any ﬁn ancial instrument for which no loss allowance is recognised because of collateral at 31 December 
2020. 6. Financial risk management (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1100
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
Personal lending
The Bank’s personal lending portfolio consists of secured and unsecured loans.
Corporate lending
The Group requests collateral and guarantees for corporate lending. The most relevant indicator of corporate customers’ 
creditworthiness is an analysis of their ﬁn ancial performance and their liquidity, leverage, management effectiveness 
and growth ratios. For this reason, the valuation of collateral held against corporate lending is not routinely updated. 
The valuation of such collateral is updated if the loan is put on the “watchlist” and is therefore monitored more closely.
For creditimpaired loans, the Group obtains appraisals of collateral to inform its credit risk management actions. 
The investment securities held by the Group are sovereign bonds and corporate bonds, which are not collateralised, as 
well as asset backed securities, which are secured by ﬁn ancial assets.
b). Liquidity management risk 
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will not be able to meet payment obligations associated with ﬁn ancial liabilities 
when they fall due and replace funds when they are withdrawn. The consequence may be the failure to meet obligations 
to repay depositors and ful ﬁl c ommitments to lend. It is the policy of the Group to maintain adequate liquidity at all 
times and to be in a position to meet all obligations, repay depositors, ful ﬁl c ommitments to lend and meet any other 
commitments as and when they fall due.
The management of liquidity risk is governed by the Bank’s liquidity policy. Responsibility for the management of 
liquidity risk lies with the Bank’s Assets and Liability Management Committee (ALCO), which is chaired by an Executive Director. ALCO is responsible for both statutory and prudential liquidity as well as compliance with regulatory requirements. 
The primary objective of liquidity risk management is to provide a planning mechanism for unanticipated changes in 
demand or needs for liquidity created by customer behaviour or abnormal market conditions.
ALCO emphasizes the maximization and preservation of customer deposits and other funding sources. ALCO also 
monitors deposit rates, levels, trends and signi ﬁc ant changes. 
Liquidity is managed on a short to medium-term basis. In the short term, the focus is on ensuring that cash flow 
demands can be met as and when required. The focus, in the medium term, is on ensuring that the balance sheet remains structurally sound and aligned to the Bank’s strategy. 
A substantial portion of the Bank’s assets are funded by customer deposits made up of current and savings accounts 
and other deposits. These customer deposits, which are widely diversi ﬁe d by type and maturity, represent a stable 
source of surplus funds. Lending is normally funded by liability in the same currency. 
The Bank also maintains signi ﬁc ant levels of marketable securities to meet compliance with prudential investment of 
surplus funds. ALCO oversees structural foreign currency and interest rate exposures that arise within the Bank. These 
responsibilities are coordinated by ALCO during monthly meetings. The Bank places low reliance on interbank funding and foreign markets.
The key measure used by the Group for managing liquidity risk is the ratio of net liquid assets to deposits from 
customers. For this purpose, net liquid assets include cash and cash equivalents and investment securities for which 
there is an active and liquid market less any deposits from banks, debt securities issued, other borrowings and commitments maturing within the next month. Details of the reported Bank’s ratio of net liquid assets to deposits from customers at the reporting date and during the reporting period were as follows:Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1101
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
b). Liquidity management risk (cont’d)
2020 2019
% %
At 31  December 56.00%            91.00%
Average for the period 81.00% 83.00%
Maximum for the period 89.00% 104.00%
Minimum for the period 67.00% 75.00%
Maturity analysis for financial assets and liabilities   
The Group manages liquidity risk. The primary objective of liquidity risk management is to provide a planning 
mechanism for unanticipated changes in demand or needs for liquidity created by customer behaviour or abnormal market conditions.
The amounts disclosed in the table are the remaining contractual undiscounted cash flows which include estimated 
interest payment. 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
2020  
GroupUp to 1 
month1-3 
months 3- 12 
monthsOver 1 year Total Carrying 
Amount
Financial liabilities by type  
Non-derivative liabilities           
Deposits from customers 2,378,933 2,806,614  4,637,589  2,137,522 11,960,658 11,960,658 
Borrowings  583,525  -  -  189,000  772,525  772,525 
Other liabilities  65,804  136,120  177,313  42,157  421,394  421,394 
Financial guarantee contracts  - 6,969  374,049  -  381,018  381,018 
Unrecognised loan commitments  578 1,728 401 -  2,707  2,707 
  3,028,840  2,951,431  5,189,352  2,368,679 13,538,302  13,538,302 
Financial assets by type 
Non-derivative assets  
Cash and cash equivalents         
Advances to banks  -  -  -  200,904  200,904  200,904 
Investment securities  1,446,287  695,667  1,403,616  5,077,276  8,622,846  8,622,846 
Trading assets  1,136 9,848  102,220  108,135  221,339  221,339 
Loans and advances to customers  733,794  432,458  996,946  1,449,390  3,612,588  3,612,588 
Investment (other than securities)  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Other asset  128,956  101,710 191,627  40,407 462,701  462,701 
Assets held for managing    liquidity 
risk 2,310,173  1,239,683 2,694,409  6,876,112 13,120,378  13,120,378 
Period liquidity gap  718,667  1,711,748 2,494,943 (4,507,433)  425,204  425,204 Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1102
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
Maturity Analysis of assets and liabilities (cont’d)
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
2019                                               
GroupUp to 1 
month1 - 3 
months3 - 12 
monthsOver 1 year Total Carrying 
Amount
Financial liabilities by type 
Non-derivative liabilities
Deposits from customers 1,969,193 2,306,102 3,652,329 1,895,165  9,822,789 9,822,789
Borrowings  68,578  200,000  -  189,000  457,578  457,578 
Other liabilities  47,043  132,086 69,523 87,022 335,674  335,674 
Financial guarantee contracts  39,533 21,389 756,309  47,049  864,280  - 
Unrecognised loan commitments  220,584  -  - -  220,584  - 
2,344,931 2,659,577  4,478,161 2,218,236 11,700,905 10,616,041 
Financial assets by type 
Non-derivative assets
Cash and cash equivalents 1,351,027  -  -  221,511  1,572,538 1,572,538
Advances to banks -  -  -  209,614 209,614 209,614
Investment securities 1,023,381  897,261 622,402 3,482,338  6,025,382 6,025,382
Trading assets  1,136 9,848 23,671  108,135  142,790 142,790 
Loans and advances to customers  564,337  804,410 824,856 1,394,050  3,587,653 3,587,653 
Investment (other than securities) -  -  - - - - 
Other asset  88,583 61,855 78,019  52,097  280,555 280,555
Assets held for managing liquidity risk 3,028,464 1,773,374  1,548,948 5,467,745 11,818,532 11,818,532 
Period liquidity gap  683,533 (886,203) (2,929,213) 3,249,509 117,627 1,202,491 
2020  
BankUp to 1 
month1-3 
months3- 12 
monthsOver 1 yearTotal    Carrying          
Amount
Financial liabilities by type  
Non-derivative liabilities           
Deposits from customers 2,378,933 2,806,614  4,637,589  2,137,522 11,960,658 11,960,658 
Borrowings  583,525  -  -  189,000  772,525  772,525 
Other liabilities  65,248 136,675  177,314  42,344  421,581  421,581 
Financial guarantee contracts  - 6,969  374,049  -  381,018  381,018 
Unrecognised loan commitments  578  1,728 401 -  2,707  2,707 
  3,028,284 2,951,986  5,189,353  2,368,866 13,538,489  13,538,489 
Financial assets by type 
Non-derivative assets  
Cash and cash equivalents  -  -  -  - -  - 
Advances to banks  -  -  -  200,904  200,904  200,904 
Investment securities  1,491,869  695,667  1,403,616  4,984,749  8,575,901  8,575,901 
Trading assets  1,136 9,848  102,220  108,135  221,339  221,339 Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1103
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’dFigures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
2020  
BankUp to 1 
month1-3 
months3- 12 
monthsOver 1 yearTotal    Carrying          
Amount
Loans and advances to customers  733,794  432,458  996,946  1,449,390  3,612,588  3,612,588 
Investment (other than securities)  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Other assets  128,956  101,710 194,639 35,127 460,432 460,432
Assets held for managing  liquidity 
risk 2,355,755  1,239,683  2,697,421  6,778,305 13,071,164  13,071,164 
Period liquidity gap  672,529  1,712,303  2,491,932 (4,409,439)  467,325  467,325 
2019                                        Bank  Up to 1 
month  1 - 3 
months  3 - 12 
months  Over 1 year  Total  Carrying 
Amount 
Financial liabilities by type Non-
derivative liabilities 
Deposits from customers 1,969,193 2,306,102 3,652,329 1,914,895  9,842,519  9,842,519 
Borrowings  68,578  200,000    189,000  457,578  457,578 
Other liabilities  47,043  132,086 69,523      87,581  336,233  336,233 
Financial guarantee contracts  39,533 21,389 756,309  47,049  864,280  - 
Unrecognised loan commitments  220,584  -  - -  220,584  - 
2,344,931 2,659,577 4,478,161 2,238,525 11,721,194   10,636,330                                                       
Financial asset by type 
Non-derivative assets Up to 1 
month  13 months  3  12 
months  Over 1 year TotalCarrying 
Amount
Cash and cash equivalents    1,370,757  -  -  201,781  1,572,538  1,572,538 
Advances to banks -  -  - 209,614 209,614 209,614
 nvestment securities 1,023,381 891,842 607,076 3,474,294 5,996,593 5,996,593 
Trading assets    1,136 9,848 23,671  108,135  142,790  142,790 
Loans and advances to customers  564,337  804,410 824,856    1,394,050  3,587,653  3,587,653 
Investment (other than securities) -  -  - - - - 
Other asset  88,583 61,855 78,019  52,084  280,541  280,541 
Asset held for managing liquidity 
risk   3,048,194 1,767,955 1,533,622    5,439,958 11,789,729    11,789,729 
Period liquidity gap 703,263 (891,622) (2,944,539) 3,201,433 68,535  1,153,399 
The amounts in the table above have been compiled as follows:
• Non-derivative ﬁn ancial liabilities and ﬁn ancial assets – undiscounted cash flows, which include estimated interest 
payment;
• Issued ﬁn ancial guarantee contracts, and unrecognised loan commitments – Earliest possible contractual maturity. 
For issued ﬁn ancial guarantee contracts, the maximum amount of the guarantee is allocated to the earliest period 
in which the guarantee could be called.
As part of the management of liquidity risk arising from ﬁn ancial liabilities, the Group holds liquid assets comprising 
cash and cash equivalents, and investments in government securities, which can be readily sold to meet liquidity 
requirements.6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
Maturity Analysis of assets and liabilities (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1104
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
Maturity Analysis of assets and liabilities (cont’d)
In the normal course of business, assets are sometimes pledged for speci ﬁc p urposes. The table below sets out the 
availability of the Group’s ﬁn ancial assets to support future funding.
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
The Group Available as 
collateralUnencumbered 
other*Total
31 Dec 2020
Cash and cash equivalents  1,567,241 - 1,567,241 
Loans and advances to customers - 3,612,588 3,612,588 
Advances to banks 200,904 - 200,904 
Investment securities 8,622,846 - 8,622,846
Trading assets 221,339 - 221,339 
Investment (other than investment securities) 110,215 -  110,215
Total assets 10,722,545 3,612,588 14,335,133 
GroupAvailable as 
collateralUnencumbered 
Other*             
Total
31 December 2019
Cash and cash equivalents  1,572,538 - 1,572,538 
Loans and advances to customers                                               - 3,587,653 3,587,653 
Advances to banks 209,614 -    209,614
Investment securities   6,025,382 - 6,025,382
Trading assets  142,790 - 142,790
Investment (other than investment securities)    35,439  - 35,439
Total assets   7,985,763 3,587,653 11,573,416
Bank Available as  
collateralUnencumbered 
Other*Total
31 Dec 2020
Cash and cash equivalents  1,567,241 - 1,567,241 
Loans and advances to customers - 3,612,588 3,612,588 
Advances to banks 200,904 -  200,904 
Investment securities  8,575,901 - 8,575,901 
Trading assets  221,339 -  221,339 
Investment (other than investment securities)  31,607  -  31,607
Total assets  10,596,992 3,612,588 14,209,580 Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1105
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
Maturity Analysis of assets and liabilities (cont’d)
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Bank Available as 
collateralUnencumbered 
Other*Total
31 December 2019
Cash and cash equivalents 1,572,538 - 1,572,538 
Loans and advances to customers  -  3,587,653 3,587,653
Advances to banks  209,614 -  209,614 
Investment securities 5,996,593 - 5,996,593 
Trading assets 142,790 -  142,790 
Investment (other than investment securities) 31,501 - 31,501 
Total assets 7,953,036 3,587,653 11,540,689 
*Represents assets that are not restricted for use as collateral, but the Group would not consider them as readily 
available to secure funding in the normal course of business.
Financial assets pledged as collateral
The Group pledged GHS 907.2m (2019: GHS 564.8m) of its investments in Government securities as collateral to Bank 
of Ghana, First Atlantic Bank, UBA Bank, Standard Chartered Bank, Fidelity Bank, Zenith Bank, CAL Bank, ADB Bank, 
FBN Bank and Teacher’s Fund. The Group has not received collateral that it is permitted to sell or repledge in the absence of default.
c). Market Risk 
Management of Market Risk 
The Group takes on exposure to market risk, which is the risk of potential loss of earnings or economic value due to 
adverse changes in ﬁn ancial market rates or prices. Market risks arise from open positions in interest rates, currency 
and equity products, all of which are exposed to general and speci ﬁc m arket movements and changes in the level of 
volatility of market rates or prices such as interest rates, credit spreads, foreign exchange rates and equity prices. The 
Group’s exposure to market risk arises principally from customer-driven transactions and pension obligations.
Foreign Exchange Exposure 
Foreign exchange or currency risk is the risk of loss that results from changes in foreign exchange rates. The Bank’s 
exposure to foreign currency risk is limited to non-trading book and is strictly controlled by the Treasury and Risk Management units. Non-trading book refers to the assets of the Bank that are not traded or held with the intent of 
trading. The Group’s foreign exchange exposures are principally derived from customer-driven transactions.
The Group and The Bank EUR USD GBP
At 31 December 2020 ‘000 ‘000 ‘000
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents 9,571 16,262 6,606 
Advances to banks -  500 -
Loans and advances to customers - 154,964 -
Total Assets  9,571 171,726 6,606 
Liabilities
Deposits due to customers 7,787 155,238 5,737 
Total liabilities 7,787 155,238 5,737 
Net on balance sheet position 1,784 16,488  869 
Off balance sheet credit commitments 29,679 419,092 -
Total Exposure 31,463 435,580  869Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1106
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
Foreign Exchange Exposure (cont’d)
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
The Group and The Bank EUR USD GBP
At 31 December 2019 ‘000 ‘000 ‘000
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents 7,577 22,543 5,797
Advances to banks 2032 12,500 145
Loans and advances to customers 714 131,821 -
Total assets 10,323 166,864 5,942
Liabilities
Deposits from customers 9,512 154,886 5,627
Total liabilities 9,512 154,886 5,627
Net onbalance sheet position 811 11,978 315
Off balance sheet credit commitments 9,793 90,674 8,919
Total exposure 10,604 102,652 9,234
The following mid interbank exchange rates were applied during the year:
Average Rate Reporting Rate
GHS to 2020 2019 2020 2019
USD 1 5.5982 5.2507 5.7602 5.5337
EUR 1 7.1864 5.8703 7.0643 6.2114
GBP 1 6.3906 6.7182 7.8742 7.3164
Foreign Exchange Sensitivity
The following table shows the effect of a strengthening or weakening of GHS against the currencies listed below on 
proﬁ t or loss and equity. This sensitivity analysis indicates the potential impact on pro ﬁ t or loss and equity based on 
foreign currency exposures recorded at 31 December (See “currency risk” above).It does not represent actual or future gains or losses.
A strengthening/weakening of the GHS by the rates shown in the table against the following currencies at 31 December 
would have impacted equity and pro ﬁ t or loss by the amounts shown below:
This analysis assumes that all other variables, in particular interest rates, remain constant. The analysis is performed 
on the same basis for 2019.
As at 31 Dec 2020 2019
In GHS % Change Profit or loss 
impact: 
StrengtheningEquity impact: 
Strengthening% Change Proﬁt  or loss 
impact: 
StrengtheningEquity impact
Strengthening
USD ±1 25,090 25,090 ±1        5,680      5,680
EUR ±1 2,223 2,223 ±1           659         659
GBP ±1  68  68 ±1           676         676
A 1% weakening of the GHS against the above currencies at 31 December would have had an equal but opposite effect.Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1107
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
Interest Rate Risk 
Interest rate exposure  
Interest rate risk is the risk that future cash flows or fair values of a ﬁn ancial instrument will fluctuate because of 
changes in market interest rates. The Group is exposed to the effects of fluctuations in the prevailing levels of market 
interest rates on both fair value and cash flow risks. Interest margins may increase as a result of such changes, which may cause losses to be incurred, in the event of unexpected movements. 
The Asset and Liability Management (“ALM”) process, managed through ALCO, is used to manage interest rate risks 
associated with the non-trading book. Gap analysis is used in measuring interest rate risk. It compares the values of interest rate sensitive assets and liabilities that mature or are re-priced at various time periods in the future. Subjective 
judgment/assumptions are made about the behaviour of assets and liabilities which do not have speci ﬁc c ontractual 
maturity or re-pricing dates.
Interest rate risk evaluates potential volatility to net interest income caused by changes in market interest rates and 
represents the most signi ﬁc ant market risk exposure to the Group’s non-trading book. The management of interest rate 
risk against interest rate gap limits is supplemented by monitoring sensitivity of the Group’s ﬁn ancial assets and liabilities 
to various standard and non-standard interest rate scenarios.
The Group
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Up to 1 1-3 3-12 Over
At 31 December 2020 month months months 1 year Total
Assets
Investment securities 1,666,980 752,867 1,403,616 4,799,383 8,622,846
Non-Pledged trading assets 1,136 9,848 102,220 108,135 221,339
Advances to banks - - - 200,904 200,904
Loans and advances to customers 733,794 432,458 996,945  1,449,390 3,612,588
Total financial assets  2,401,910  1,195,173  2,502,781 6,557,812 12,657,677
Liabilities
Interest bearing deposits 2,386,211 2,806,614 4,637,589 2,137,522 11,967,936 
Borrowings 583,525 -  -  189,000  772,525 
Total financial liabilities  2,969,736  2,806,614  4,637,589  2,326,522 12,740,461 
Total interest rate gap  (567,826)  (1,611,441) (2,134,808) 4,231, 290 (82,784)
2019                                                  
GroupUp to 1 
month1-3     
months3-12    
monthsOver 1  year Total
Assets
Investment securities 1,023,381 897,261 622,402 3,482,338 6,025,382
Trading assets 1,136 9,848 23,671 108,135 142,790
Advances to banks - - - 209,614 209,614
Loans and advances to customers 564,337  804,410 824,856 1,394,050 3,587,653
Total ﬁnancial assets 1,588,854  1,711,519  1,470,929 5,194,137 9,965,439
LiabilitiesInterest bearing deposits  1,969,193  2,306,102  3,849,648 1,697,846 9,822,789
Borrowings 68,578  200,000 -  189,000 457,578
Total ﬁnancial liabilities  2,037,771  2,506,102  3,849,648 1,886,846 10,280,367
Total interest gap (448,917) (794,583) (2,378,719) 3,307,291 (314,928)Notes to the Financial Statements cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1108
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
Interest Rate Risk (cont’d)
Interest rate exposure (cont’d)
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Bank Up to 1 1-3 3-12 Over
At 31 December 2020 month months months 1 year Total
Assets
Investment securities 1,621,387  752,867  1,403,616  4,798,031 8,575,901 
Non-Pledged Trading Assets  1,136  9,848 102,220 108,135  221,339 
Advances to banks - - - 200,904  200,904 
Loans and advances to customers  733,794  432,458 996,946  1,449,390 3,612,588 
Total financial assets 2,356,317 1,195,173  2,502,782  6,556,460 12,610,732 
Liabilities          
Interest bearing deposits 2,386,211 2,806,614  4,637,589  2,137,522 11,967,936 
Borrowings  583,525 -  -  189,000  772,525 
Total financial liabilities 2,969,736 2,806,614  4,637,589  2,326,522 12,740,461 
Total interest rate gap  (613,419)  (1,611,441) (2,134,807)  4,229,938 (129,729)
2019                                                               
BankUp to 1 
month13   
months3-12 
monthsOver 1 
yearTotal 
Assets
Investment securities  1,023,381  891,842 607,076 3,474,294 5,996,593
Trading assets  1,136  9,848 23,671  108,135 142,790
Advances to banks - - -  209,614 209,614
Loans and advances to customers 564,337  804,410 824,856 1,394,050 3,587,653
Total ﬁn ancial assets  1,588,854  1,706,100  1,455,603 5,186,093 9,936,650
Liabilities
Interest bearing deposits  1,969,193  2,306,102  3,849,648 1,717,576 9,842,519
Borrowings 68,578  200,000 -  189,000 457,578
Total ﬁn ancial liabilities  2,037,771  2,506,102  3,849,648 1,906,576  10,300,097 
Total interest rate gap (448,917) (800,002) (2,394,045) 3,279,517 (363,447)
Analysis of the Group’s sensitivity to market interest
Standard scenarios that are considered on a monthly basis include a 200 basis point (bp) parallel fall or rise in market 
interest rates. A change of a 200 basis points in interest rates at the reporting date would have impacted equity and 
proﬁ t or loss by the amounts shown below:
2020 2019
Group Increase Decrease Increase Decrease 
Interest income impact  21,096 (21,096)  16,611 (16,611)
Interest expense impact  (21,234) 21,234 (17,167) 17,167
Net impact  (138) 138 (556) 556Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1109
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
Interest Rate Risk (cont’d)
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
2020 2019
Bank Increase Decrease Increase Decrease 
Interest income impact  21,018 (21,018) 16,323 (16,323)
Interest expense impact  (21,234) 21,234 (17,167) 17,167
Net impact  (216) 216 (844) 844
b)  Market risk monitoring and control 
The Risk Management Division (RMD) is responsible for monitoring the Bank’s exposure to market risk. The analysis 
of impact of unlikely but plausible events by means of scenario analysis enables management to gain a better 
understanding of risks that the Bank is potentially exposed to under adverse conditions.
c)  Operational risk
Operational risk is the risk of direct or indirect loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, systems or 
human factors, or from external events. Operational risk is inherent in the Group’s business activities and, as with other risk types, is managed through an overall framework designed to balance strong corporate oversight with well-
deﬁne d independent risk management. The Group endeavours to minimize operational losses by ensuring that 
effective infrastructure, controls, systems and individuals are in place throughout the organization. 
Operational Risk Framework 
To monitor, mitigate and control operational risk, the Group maintains a system of policies and has established a 
framework for assessing and communicating operational risks as well as the overall effectiveness of the internal control environment across business lines. Each major business segment is expected to implement an operational risk process consistent with the requirements of this framework. The process for operational risk management includes the following steps: 
• identify and assess key operational risks; 
• establish key risk indicators; 
• produce comprehensive operational risk reports; and 
• prioritize and ensure adequate resources to actively improve the operational risk environment and mitigate emerging risks. 
The operational risk standards facilitate the effective communication and mitigation actions both within and across businesses. The Group is committed to continuously enhancing its operational risk framework to encourage a culture 
of effective accountability and responsibility .
d)  Compliance and regulatory risk
Compliance and Regulatory risk includes the risk of non-compliance with regulatory requirements. The Group’s 
Compliance Unit is responsible for establishing and maintaining an appropriate framework for the Group’s compliance 
policies and procedures. Compliance with such policies and procedures is the responsibility of all managers. However, the Compliance Unit monitors and reports on compliance to Executive Management and the Board. The Group 
generally complied with regulatory requirements.
e)  Capital management
The Group’s policy is to maintain a strong capital base so as to maintain investor and market con ﬁd ence and sustain 
future development of the business. The impact of the level of capital on shareholders’ return is also taken into 
consideration in addition to security afforded by sound capital positions. The Bank complied with the statutory capital requirements throughout the period under review. The subsidiary is not subject to externally imposed capital 
requirements. 
Capital adequacy and the use of regulatory capital are monitored daily by management, employing techniques based 
on guidelines developed by the Basel Committee as implemented by Bank of Ghana for supervisory purposes.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1110
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
e)  Capital management (cont’d)  
The required information is ﬁl ed with Bank of Ghana on a monthly basis. Bank of Ghana requires each bank to: 
• Hold a minimum regulatory capital of GHS 400 million; and 
• Maintain a ratio of total regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets plus risk weighted off balance sheet assets 
above a required minimum of 10%. 
The Bank generally complied with all externally imposed capital requirements. 
The Bank’s capital is divided into two tiers: 
• Tier 1 capital includes ordinary paid up capital and disclosed reserves, excluding the value of assets such as 
investment in other banks and ﬁn ancial institutions.
• Tier 2 capital is made up of reserves such as unrealized gains on equity instruments classi ﬁe d as fair value 
through other comprehensive income. 
Non-risk weighted assets are classi ﬁe d as cash on hand, claims on government and claims on the Central Bank. Risk-
weighted assets are determined according to speci ﬁe d requirements that seek to reflect the varying levels of risk 
attached to assets and off -balance sheet exposures.
2020 2019
Bank Group Bank Group
Tier 1 Capital
Stated capital ordinary  500,000 500,000 500,000 500,000
Statutory reserve  569,971 569,971 460,096 460,096
Retained earnings 1,013,504  1,111,387 736,876 828,873
Intangible/other assets  (190,921) (190,921) (201,820) (201,820)
Deferred tax assets  (157,455) (158,465) (101,810) (95,324)
Investments in capital of other Banks and ﬁn ancial / other institutions (31,607)  (101,759) (51,501) (128,056)
Total qualifying tier 1 capital 1,703,492  1,730,213 1,341,841 1,363,769
Tier 2 Capital        
Fair value reserves  (1,754) 5,395 (1,845) 1,581
Other reserves  (32,429) (755) (43,073) (10,188)
Total qualifying tier 2 capital (34,183) 4,640 (44,918) (8,607)
Total regulatory capital 1,669,309 1,734,853 1,296,923 1,355,162
Risk profile
Total credit risk equivalent weighted asset (RWA)  5,155,357 5,158,266 5,009,851 5,010,562
Total operational risk equivalent weighted asset (RWA) 2,858,536 2,858,536 2,344,238 2,344,238
Total market risk equivalent weighted asset (RWA)  62,725 62,725 55,134 55,134
Total RWA 8,076,618 8,080,271 7,409,223 7,409,934
Regulatory Quantitative Disclosures
Capital Adequacy Ratio 20.67% 21.51% 17.50% 18.29%
Non-Performing Loans Ratio 8.71% 8.71% 6.01% 6.01%
Liquid Ratio 64% 65% 60% 60%
Compliance with Statutory Liquidity
(i) Default in Statutory Liquidity 183 183 Nil Nil
(ii) Default in Statutory Sanction Nil Nil Nil NilNotes to the Financial Statements  cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1111
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d6. Financial risk management (cont’d)
e) Capital management (cont’d)
The Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) has been computed in accordance with the Capital Requirement Directive (CRD) by 
Bank of Ghana. The CRD was developed and issued by Bank of Ghana for the adoption of all banks in Ghana. It is based 
on the Basel II and III frameworks.
Non- performing loans 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
2020 2019
Non-Performing Loans (Sub-standard to Loss) 366,916 238,050
NPL Ratio (Non-performing loans/ total gross loans) 8.71% 6.01%
f)  Renegotiated loans which have been reclassified
Loans renegotiated and reclassi ﬁe d during the year amounted to GHS 126,746,665.
g)  Amount of repossessed properties/collateral
No collaterals were repossessed during the year. (2019: Nil)
h)  Statutory breaches and non-compliance with other prudential requirements;
The Bank recorded a liquidity breach during the period under review. The bank was levied a penalty of GHS 
182,535 due to the breach.
7.   Fair values of financial instruments 
The fair values of ﬁn ancial assets and ﬁn ancial liabilities that are traded in active markets are based on quoted market 
prices or dealer price quotations. For all other ﬁn ancial instruments, the Group determines fair values using other 
valuation techniques.
For ﬁn ancial instruments that trade infrequently and have little price transparency, fair value is less objective, and 
require varying degrees of judgment depending on liquidity, concentration, uncertainty of market factors, pricing 
assumptions and other risks affecting the speci ﬁc  instrument.
(a) Valuation models
The Group measures fair values using the following fair value hierarchy, which reflects the signi ﬁc ance of inputs used 
in making the measurements.
The objective of valuation techniques is to arrive at a fair value measurement that reflects the price that would be 
received to sell the asset or paid to transfer the liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. 
The Group uses widely recognised valuation models for determining the fair value of common and more simple 
ﬁn ancial instruments that use only observable market data and require little management judgment and estimation.
Availability of observable market prices and model inputs reduces the need for management judgment and estimation 
and also reduces the uncertainty associated with determining fair values. Availability of observable market prices and 
inputs varies depending on the products and markets and is prone to changes based on speci ﬁc e vents and general 
conditions in the ﬁn ancial markets.
b) Valuation framework
The objective of a fair value measurement is to estimate the price at which an orderly transaction to sell the asset or 
transfer the liability would take place between market participants at the measurement date under current market conditions. A fair value measurement requires an entity to determine all the following:
• The particular asset or liability that is the subject of measurement (consistently with the unit of account);
• The principal (or most advantageous) market for the asset or liability;
• The valuation technique(s) appropriate for the measurement, considering the availability of data with which to develop inputs that represent the assumptions that market participants would use when pricing the asset or liability and the level of the fair value hierarchy within which the inputs are categorized.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1112
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d7.  Fair values of financial instruments (cont’d)
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
2020 2019
Level 1 Level 1
Bank Group Bank Group
Investment in equity securities AFS 1,895 2994 1,895 3,049
Investment securities  FVTPL 221,339 221,339 142,790 142,790
223,234 224,333 144,685 145,839
Level 3  Level 3
Bank Group Bank Group
Investment in unlisted equity securities 438 15,540 332 12,390
438 15,540 332 12,390
Valuation Technique
The Income approach was used for the valuation of the unlisted equities. The Dividend Growth and the Book Value 
methods speci ﬁc ally were adopted for the purposes of the valuation.
Main inputs and assumptions Level 2 and level 3 inputs were deployed in the valuation.
The following information were used:
• Dividend Income of the entities being valued.
• Beta of all shares listed on the GSE from the Bloomberg Terminal. The average beta for entities similar to the ones 
being valued was used to value the respective investee company.
• The 20-year Government of Ghana Bond rate of 21.82% was used as the discount rate.
• Market rate of return, using the GSE Composite Index as a proxy.
7i. Financial instruments not measured at fair value
The carrying amount of the ﬁn ancial instruments not measured at fair value approximate their fair values.
7ii. Classification of financial assets and financial liabilities
Accounting classifications and fair values
The table below sets out the Group’s classi ﬁc ation of each class of ﬁn ancial assets and liabilities. Fair value is the price 
that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date in the principal or, in its absence, the most advantageous market to which the Group has access at that date.Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1113
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d7ii. Classification of financial assets and financial liabilities cont’d 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Bank Fair value 
through profit 
or lossAmortised 
costFair value 
through  
OCIFinancial 
liabilitiesTotal 
carrying  
amount
31 December, 2020
Cash and cash equivalents  -  1,567,241  -  -  1,567,241 
Investment securities  -  8,575,901  -  -  8,575,901 
Trading Assets  221,339  -  -  - 221,339
Advances to banks  - 200,904  -  - 200,904 
Loans and advances to customers  - 3,612,588  -  -  3,612,588 
Investments (other than investment  
securities) -  - 2,333  - 2,333 
Other assets  - 460,432  -  - 460,432 
Total assets  221,339 14,417,066 2,333  - 14,640,738 
Deposits from banks & other ﬁn ancial 
institutions- - - 615,418 615,418
Deposits from customers - - -11,352,518 11,352,518
Other liabilities - - - 421,581 421,581
Borrowings - - - 772,525 772,525
Total liabilities - - -13,162,042 13,162,042
Bank Fair value 
through pro ﬁt  
or lossAmortised 
costFair value 
through OCIFinancial 
liabilitiesTotal     
carrying 
amount
31 December 2019
Cash and cash equivalents - 1,572,538 -  - 1,572,538 
Investment securities - 5,996,593 -  - 5,996,593 
Trading assets 142,790 -  -  142,790 
Advances to banks -  209,614 -  -  209,614 
Loans and advances to customers - 3,587,653 -  - 3,587,653 
Investment (other than investment 
securities) - - 2,227  -  2,227 
Other assets - 300,541  -  300,541 
Total assets 142,790 11,666,939 2,227  - 11,811,956
Deposits from banks & other ﬁn ancial 
institutions- - - 501,911 501,911
Deposits from customers - - -9,340,608 9,340,608
Other liabilities - - - 336,233 336,233
Borrowings - - - 457,578 457,578
Total liabilities - - -10,636,330 10,636,330Notes to the Financial Statements cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1114
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d7.  Fair values of financial instruments (cont’d)
7ii. Classification of financial assets and financial liabilities (cont’d)
Accounting classifications and fair values (cont’d)
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Group Fair value 
through profit 
or lossAmortised 
costFair value 
through  
OCIFinancial 
liabilitiesTotal 
carrying 
amount
31 December, 2020Cash and cash equivalents  - 1,567,241  -  - 1,567,241 
Investment securities  - 8,622,846  -  - 8,622,846 
Trading Assets 221,339  -  -  -  221,339 
Advances to banks  -  200,904  -  -  200,904 
Loans and advances to customers  - 3,612,588  -  - 3,612,588 
Investments (other than investment 
securities) -  -  18,534  -  18,534 
Other assets  -  462,701  -  -  462,701 
Total assets  221,339 14,466,280  18,534  - 14,706,153 
Deposits from banks & other ﬁn ancial 
institutions -  -  -  615,418  615,418 
Deposits from customers  -  -  - 11,345,240 11,345,240 
Other liabilities  -  -  -  421,395  421,395 
Borrowings  -  -  -  772,525  772,525 
Total liabilities  - -  - 13,154,578 13,154,578 
Group Fair value 
through pro ﬁt  
or lossAmortised 
costFair value 
through OCIFinancial 
liabilitiesTotal   
carrying 
amount
2019          
Cash and cash equivalents - 1,572,538 - -  1,572,538 
Investment securities - 6,025,382 - -  6,025,382 
Trading assets 142,790  - - - 142,790 
Advances to banks - 209,614 - - 209,614
Loans and advances to customers - 3,587,653 - -  3,587,653 
Investment (other than investment 
securities) -  - 15,440 - 15,440 
Other assets - 300,555 - - 300,555
Total 142,790 11,695,742 15,440 -  11,853,972
Deposits from banks & other ﬁn ancial 
institutions- - - 501,911 501,911
Deposits from customers - - - 9,320,879 9,320,879
Other liabilities - - - 335,674 335,674
Borrowings - - - 457,578 457,578
Total liabilities - - - 10,616,042 10,616,042Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1115
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d8.  Operating segments
a.   Segment information
For performance management purposes, the Bank is organized into 4 core segments based on their products and 
services. These are:
• Consumer Banking;
• Corporate Banking; 
• Treasury; and
• SME
The Consumer Banking arm of the business concentrates mainly on individual customers and therefore provides the required platform to enhance service delivery to that segment. The coverage of this function also extends to sole proprietorships and very small and medium scale enterprises.
Corporate Banking is responsible for the Business Banking customer pro ﬁl e. The function is subcategorized into 
Multinational Corporate, Large Local Corporate, Development Organizations and Public Sector. Depending on customer 
proﬁl ing, clients of this function are mostly relationship managed with a few of them managed on portfolio basis.
The Treasury function provides the expertise and platform for the centralized management of the Group’s market risk exposures. The function manages the funding requirements and ensures that the Bank is well capitalized to boost 
investor con ﬁde nce and sustain future development of the business.
The Small and Medium Scale Enterprises arm of the business provides banking services by way of ﬁn ancing and raising 
deposit as well as providing trade services to these small scale clients.
For the purpose of segmental reporting, surplus funds or de ﬁc it per business unit is either sold to or purchased from 
the Bank pool based on a pool rate determined by Treasury using the Group’s cost of funds plus a margin for both local and foreign currencies.
Management monitors the operating results of business segments separately for the purpose of making decisions 
about resource allocation and for assessing performance. Segment performance is evaluated based on operating 
proﬁ t or loss together with the underlying balance sheet position for the reporting period. To be able to assess each of 
the three businesses in a fairer and consistent manner, common corporate operating expenses are allocated to segments based on an established costsharing policy that permits a reasonable and consistent allocation of central management expenses.
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
31 Dec 2020
External Revenue Consumer Corporate Treasury SME Total
Net interest income 116,531 148,955 1,187,565 46,835  1,499,886 
Inter-segment revenue 563,494 123,714  (825,521) 138,313 - 
Net fees and commission income 160,843 60,177  10,161 32,813 263,994 
Net trading income  - 11,485  149,890 5,253 166,628 
Other income/other revenue 1,167 2,223  2,589 1,621 7,600 
Total segment revenue 842,035 346,554  524,684 224,835  1,938,108 
Operating expenses  (593,876) (211,361)  (122,717) (188,619) (1,116,572)
Other material non-cash items:  -  -  -  -  - 
Impairment loss on loans and advances (22,339)  (166,905) (310) (30,093)  (219,647)
Reportable segmental pro ﬁt  before tax  225,820  (31,712) 401,657  6,123  601,889 
Reportable segment assets 1,302,425 1,603,082     10,695,466 577,000  14,177,973 
Reportable segment liabilities 6,791,322 3,288,267  773,340 1,887,531  12,740,460 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1116
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d8.  Operating segments
a.   Segment information (cont’d)
 Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
31 December 2019 Consumer Corporate Treasury SME Total
External revenue
Net interest income  123,068 220,866 775,898 45,975 1,165,807 
Intersegment revenue  422,786 39,273  (552,079) 90,020 - 
Net fees and commissions  144,177 58,932 7,371 31,025 241,505 
Net trading income - 14,963 119,861 6,921 141,745
Other income / other revenue  1,987 4,775 7,626 - 14,388 
Total segment revenue  692,018 338,809 358,677  173,941  1,563,445 
Operating expenses (484,912) (177,208) (101,663) (159,488) (923,271)
Other material noncash items:
Impairment loss on loans and advances (2,396)       (63,460) (4,541) (5,124) (75,521)
Reportable segmental pro ﬁt  before tax 204,710 98,141 252,473 9,329 564,653
Reportable segment assets 1,241,018 2,037,516 7,921,535 309,639 11,509,708
Reportable segment liabilities 5,509,265 2,842,311 457,578 1,490,943 10,300,097
c. Reconciliations of information on reportable segment
i. Assets
Total assets for reportable entities 14,177,973 11,509,708
Unallocated amounts 1,146,683 907,033
Total assets 15,324,656 12,416,741
ii. Liabilities
2020 2019
Total liabilities for reportable entities 12,740,460   10,300,097
Unallocated amounts  534,904        464,590
Total liabilities 13,275,364   10,764,687
d. Geographic information
  In Ghana Outside Ghana Total
2020 2019 2020 2019 2020 2019
Revenues 1,937,702 1,560,494 405 2,951 1,938,107 1,563,445
No individual customer contributed 10% or more to revenue. Segment revenue is based on the geographical location 
of customers, whilst segment asset is based on the geographical location of assets.
In Ghana Outside Ghana Total
Noncurrent assets 2020 2019 2020 2019 2020 2019
Property, equipment and right -of- use asset 280,013 271,645 - -280,013 271,645
Intangible assets 190,921 201,820 - -190,921 201,820
Total 470,934 473,465 - -470,934 473,465Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1117
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d9.  Interest income
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
2020 2019
Bank Group Bank Group
Cash and short term funds 77,630 77,656 83,599 83,551
Investment securities  1,147,094 1,155,835 798,605 801,137
Loans and advances to customers 705,417 705,417 670,958 670,958
  1,930,141 1,938,908 1,553,162 1,555,646
10.  Interest expense
2020 2019
Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost Bank Group Bank Group
Current and savings accounts 168,318  168,318 145,117 145,117
Time and other deposits 199,535  199,535 186,602 186,602
Borrowings 62,402  62,357 55,636 55,475
  430,255  430,210 387,355 387,194
11.  Fee and commission income
2020 2019
  Bank Group Bank Group
Commission on letters of credit and guarantees  10,052  10,052 8,503 8,503
Commission on foreign services  25,701  25,701 22,274 22,274
Commission on turnover  51,527  51,527 50,665 50,665
Processing and facility fees  41,955  41,955 47,772 47,772
Other fees and commissions (Note 11.1) 186,481  200,467 163,913 163,913
Total Fee and Commission Income  315,716  329,702 293,127 293,127
11. 1 Other fees and commissions include earnings from payment orders, bancassurance, mobile ﬁn ancial services and 
money transfers.
12.  Fee and commission expense
2020 2019
  Bank Group Bank Group
Fee and commission expense 51,722 51,722 51,622 51,622
Total 51,722 51,722 51,622 51,622
13.  Net trading income
2020 2019
  Bank Group Bank Group
Foreign exchange  95,835  95,835 127,039 127,039
Fixed income trading  70,793  70,793 14,706 14,706
   166,628 166,628 141,745 141,745Notes to the Financial Statements cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1118
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d13.  Net trading income (cont’d)
Foreign exchange income includes gains and losses from spot and forward contracts and other currency derivatives. 
There was no foreign currency derivative during the period under review. Other foreign exchange differences arising 
on non-trading activities are taken to other operating income/expense in the statement of pro ﬁ t or loss and other 
comprehensive income.
14.  Other operating income
 Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
                            2020 2019
  Bank Group Bank Group
Dividend income 702  7,476 2,951 8,915
Bad debt recoveries 125  125 2,405 2,405
Claims against operational loss  6,774  6,774 8,490 9,260
Rental income 434 434 310 355
Proﬁt /(Loss) on sale of property and equipment (435)  (435) 232 232
   7,600  14,374 14,388 21,167
15.  Net impairment loss on financial assets
2020 2019
  Bank Group Bank           Group
Impairment charge 219,647 219,647 75,521      75,521
Analysis of impairment charge                         
Allowance for impairment – Advances to banks  (4,941) (4,941) 498           498
Allowance for impairment – loans and advances  224,588 224,588  75,023        75,023
  219,647 219,647 75,521        75,521
16.  Other expenses 
             2020 2019
  Bank Group Bank Group
Technology and communication 123,153 123,153  81,981  81,981 
Advertising and marketing 11,307 11,307  5,054  5,054 
Training 1,446 1,447  8,259  8,259 
Audit fees 1,610 1,681  1,400  1,448 
Donations 10,182 10,184  10,425  10,425 
Utilities 20,253 20,253  22,325  22,325 
Other professional fees 52,108 52,108  34,289  34,289 
Rent and rates 6,105 6,105  11,354  11,354 
Repairs and maintenance 22,183 22,183  16,608  16,608 
Security services 16,665 16,665  14,973  14,973 
Travelling 2,926 2,926  10,092  10,092 
Business promotion 10,012 10,012  3,801  3,801 
Settlement of legal cases 2,065 2,065  4,562  4,562 
Other administrative expenses 134,140 144,959 76,255 76,632 
      414,155 425,048 301,378 301,803 Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1119
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d17.  Personnel expenses
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
2020 2019
Staff expense comprise: Bank Group Bank Group
Wages and salaries  218,381 220,272 189,393 190,093
Staff allowances  168,466 168,466 157,976 157,976
Performance award  59,626 59,626 50,799 50,799
Social security fund contributions  27,466 27,466 24,283 24,283
Provident fund contributions  25,672 25,672 22,885 22,885
Retirement bene ﬁt  obligations  23,968 23,968 19,583 19,583
Restructuring cost 1,752 1,752 16 16
Other staff costs  31,000  31,013 28,588 28,588
Directors fees  3,619  3,698 3,209 3,288
   559,950 561,933 496,732 497,511
The number of persons employed by the Group at the year end was 2,354 (2019: 2,393)
18.   Income tax expense
2020 2019
 Amount recognised in profit or loss Bank Group Bank Group
Current tax expense        
Corporate tax  191,501  194,506 157,991 159,213
National Fiscal Stabilisation Levy 30,095  30,095 28,233 28,233
Change to estimates for prior years - - (71) (71)
   221,596  224,601 186,153 187,375
Deferred tax expense        
Total income tax expense 162,388  165,437 143,650 145,211
Reconciliation of the tax expense
The tax charge on the Group and Bank’s pro ﬁt b efore tax differs from the theoretical amount that would arise using the 
basic tax rate as follows(:)
2020 2019
  Bank Group Bank Group
Proﬁt  before tax  601,889 610,826 564,653 573,668
Corporate tax rate 25% 25% 25% 25%
National ﬁs cal stabilisation levy rate 5% 5% 5% 5%
Tax calculated at corporate tax rate  150,472  152,706 141,163 143,417
Non-deductible expenses (17,166) (17,123) (23,156) (23,156)
Tax exempt income  (245)  (48) (836) (2,241)
Income subject to tax at different rate  (864)  (864) 246 958
Tax incentive  96  671 (1,929) (1,929)
National ﬁs cal stabilisation levy 30,095  30,095 28,233 28,233
Tax adjustment related to prior year (2018 tax audit report) - - (71) (71)
Current income tax charge  162,388  165,437 143,650 145,211
Effective tax rate 26.98% 27.08% 27.61% 27.42%Notes to the Financial Statements cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1120
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d19. Current tax (assets) / liabilities
The movement on the current account was as follows:
 Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Group                                                                                       2020 Balance at 
1 January Charge for 
the year Payment Balance at 
31 December 
Year of assessment
Up to 2019 (7,719) - -  (7,719)
2020 - 194,507 (220,875)  (26,368)
National ﬁs cal stabilization levy  16,807 30,095 (38,552)  8,350
Tax adjustment related to prior year (2018 tax audit report)  (71)  12,115  (12,115) (71)
 9,017 236,717 (271,542)  (25,808)
Group                                                                                  
2019Balance at 
1 January Charge for 
the year Payment Balance at 
31 December 
Year of assessment
Up to 2018 (10,407) - -         (10,407)
2019 - 159,213 (156,525)            2,688
Tax on staff cost (operating expenses) - - (623)              (623)
(10,407) 159,213 (157,148)          (8,342)
National ﬁscal stabilisation levy for 2019 10,825 28,233 (22,251)         16,807
Tax adjustment - prior year (2018 tax audit report) - 552 -              552
10,825 28,785 (22,251)         17,359
Total 418 187,998 (179,399)           9,017
Bank                                                                             2020Balance at 
1 January Charge for 
the year Payment Balance at 
31 December 
Year of assessment
Up to 2019 (7,043) - -        (7,043)
2020 - 191,501 (218,992)       (27,491)
Tax adjustment related to prior year (2018 tax audit report)  (71)  12,115 (12,115)              (71)
National ﬁs cal stabilization levy  16,807 30,095 (38,552)         8,350
 9,693 233,711 (269,659)       (26,255)
Bank                                                                                  
2019Balance at 
1 January Charge for 
the year Payment Balance at 
31 December 
Year of assessment
Up to 2018 (11,493) - -    (11,493)
2019 -  157,991  (153,541)       4,450 
Tax adjustment related to prior year (2018 tax audit report) - 552   (623)           (71)
National ﬁs cal stabilization levy   10,825  28,233 (22,251)     16,807 
Total (668)  186,776  (176,415)       9,693 
The tax position up to the 2019 year of assessment has been agreed with the tax authorities. Liabilities arising have 
been settled as of 31 December 2020. The tax position for the remaining year of assessment is yet to be agreed with the tax authorities. Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1121
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d20. Deferred taxation (assets) / liabilities
 Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Bank Balance at 
1/1Movement 
during the year Balance 
at 31/12Deferred 
tax assets Deferred tax 
liabilities 
2020
Recognised in profit and loss
Property and equipment  18,927 1,434 20,361 - 20,361 
Loans and advances (62,278) (57,872) (120,150)  (120,150) - 
Employee bene ﬁt  obligation (15,309) (2,212) (17,521)  (17,521) - 
Provisions  -  (558)  (558) (558) - 
(58,660) (59,208) (117,868)  (138,229) 20,361 
Recognised in OCI
Employment bene ﬁt  obligations (14,361) 3,548 (10,813)  (10,813) - 
Available for sale investments 647  -  647 -  647 
Adjustment AFS equity investments  (108)  -  (108) - - 
Fair Value-Unlisted Investment 12  15  27  27 - 
(13,810) 3,563 (10,247)  (10,786)  647 
Recognised in Retained Earnings
Impairment for 2017 (IFRS 9) (29,340)  - (29,340) - - 
 -  -  - - - 
Total (101,810) (55,645) (157,455)  (149,015) 21,008 
Group
2020Recognised in profit and loss  18,927 1,434 20,361 - 20,361 
Property and equipment (62,278) (57,872) (120,150)  (120,150) - 
Loans and advances (15,309) (2,212) (17,521)  (17,521) - 
Employee bene ﬁt  obligation  -  (558)  (558) (558) - 
Provisions  -  44  44  44 - 
Tax losses carried forward (58,660) (59,164) (117,824)  (138,185) 20,361 
Recognised in OCI
Employment bene ﬁt  obligations (14,361) 3,548 (10,813)  (10,813) - 
Available for sale equity investments 268  (6)  262 -  262 
Adjustment AFS equity investments  (107)  -  (107) (107) - 
Fair Value-Unlisted investment in subsidiary 
-2018(5,368)  - (5,368)  (5,368) - 
Fair Value-Unlisted investment in subsidiary -2017 12,232  - 12,232 - 12,232 
Fair Value-Unlisted Investment 12 (7,519) (7,507) - (7,507)
  (7,324) (3,977) (11,301)  (16,288) 4,987
Recognised in Retained Earnings
Impairment for 2017 (IFRS 9) (29,340)  - (29,340) - - 
  (95,324) (63,141) (158,465)  (154,473) 25,348 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’dBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1122
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d20. Deferred taxation (assets) / liabilities (cont’d)
 Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Bank Balance 
at 1/1Movement 
during the year Balance at 
31/12Deferred tax 
assets Deferred tax 
liabilities 
2019
Recognised in pro ﬁt a nd loss
Property and equipment  15,959 2,968 18,927 - 18,927 
Loans and advances (16,745) (45,533) (62,278)  (62,278) - 
Employee bene ﬁt  obligation (14,753) (556) (15,309)  (15,309) - 
Provisions  (618)  618  - - - 
(16,157) (42,503) (58,660)  (77,587) 18,927 
Recognised in OCI
Employment bene ﬁt  obligations (10,229) (4,132) (14,361)  (14,361) - 
Available for sale investments 130  517  647 -  647 
Adjustment AFS equity investments  (108)  -  (108) - - 
Fair Value-Unlisted Investment 59  (47)  12  12 - 
(10,148) (3,662) (13,810)  (14,349)  647 
Recognised in Retained Earnings
Impairment for 2017 (IFRS 9) (29,340)  - (29,340) - - 
(55,645) (46,165) (101,810)  (91,936) 19,574 
Group Balance 
at 1 Jan.Movement 
during the yearBalance 
at 31 Dec.Deferred 
tax assetsDeferred tax 
liabilities
2019
Recognised in pro ﬁt a nd loss
Property and equipment  15,959 2,968 18,927 18,927
Loans and advances (16,745) (45,533) (62,278) (62,278) -
Employee bene ﬁt  obligation (14,753) (556) (15,309) (15,309) -
Provisions (618) 618 - - -
Tax losses carried forward (340) 340 - - -
(16,497) (42,163) (58,660) (77,587) 18,927
Recognised in OCI
Employee bene ﬁt  obligations (10,229) (4,132) (14,361) (14,361) -
Listed equity instruments (187) 471 284 - 284
Adjustment AFS equity investments (107) - (107) (107) -
Fair value- Unlisted investments Subsidiary (3,804) (1,579) (5,383) (5,383) -
Fair value – unlisted investment in subsidiary -2017 12,232 - 12,232 - 12,232
Fair value – unlisted investment 59 (47) 12 - 12
(2,036) (5,287) (7,323) (19,851) 12,528
Recognised in retained earnings
IFRS 9 impairment- loans and advances (29,340) -(29,340) - -
Total (47,873) (47,450) (95,323) (97,438) 31,455Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1123
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d21.  Earnings per share
Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the net pro ﬁ t attributable to equity holders of the Bank by the 
weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
2020 2019
  Bank Group Bank Group
Proﬁt  attributable to equity holders  439,501  445,389 421,003 428,457
Weighted average number of ordinary shares (basic and diluted)  265,000 265,000 265,000 265,000
Basic earnings per share (expressed in Ghana 
pesewas per share) 166  168  159  162
Diluted earnings per share (expressed in Ghana pesewas per share) 166 168 159 162
22. Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents consist of:
2020 2019
  Bank Group Bank Group
Cash on hand  295,744  295,744  228,553  228,553 
Balance with Bank of Ghana  820,182  820,182  776,837  776,837 
Items in course of collection  307,953  307,953  353,985  353,985 
Accounts with other Banks  143,362  143,362  146,759  146,759 
Money market  -  -  66,404  66,404 
1,567,241 1,567,241  1,572,538  1,572,538 
An amount of GHS 945,793,267 was maintained with Bank of Ghana (2019:GHS 947,501,989) representing the 
mandatory cash reserve as per the weekly Banking Supervision Department (BSD1) returns for the week ending 13 January 2021 (2019: 2 January 2020). This reserve represents and complies with the mandatory minimum of 8% 
(2019: 10%) of the Bank’s total deposits and is not available for use in the Bank’s day-to-day operations. Cash on hand, 
items in course of collection and balances with Bank of Ghana are non-interest-bearing.
23.  Non-pledged trading assets
2020 2019
Bank Group Bank Group
At 1 January  142,790 142,790 80,004 80,004
Additions  6,839,518  6,839,518 7,419,759 7,419,759
Disposals (6,866,241) (6,866,241) (7,398,870) (7,398,870)
Gains from changes in fair value  105,272 105,272 41,897 41,897
At 31 December  221,339 221,339 142,790 142,790
24. Derivative financial instruments
The Group enters into derivatives for trading as explained in Note 4.7 in the Summary of Signi ﬁc ant Accounting 
Policies. The Group may take positions with the expectation of pro ﬁ ting from favourable movements in rates. The table 
below shows the fair values of derivative ﬁn ancial instruments recorded as assets or liabilities together with their 
notional amounts. The notional amount, recorded gross, is the quantity of the derivative contracts’ underlying 
instrument (being a foreign currency). The notional amounts indicate the volume of transactions outstanding at the year end and are not indicative of either the market or credit risk.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1124
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d24. Derivative financial instruments (cont’d)
Bank and Group Foreign exchange 
contractsForeign exchange 
contracts
Carrying value asset - 17,474 
Carrying value liability - (17,238) 
Fair value gain - 236
Notional Amount - 553,370
At their inception, derivatives often involve only an exchange of cash or other assets in the future, with little or no 
transfer of initial consideration. However, these instruments frequently involve a high degree of leverage and the value 
of the amounts required to be exchanged can be signi ﬁc antly higher than the initial investment. A relatively small 
movement in the value of the underlying asset, rate or index underlying a derivative contract may have a signi ﬁc ant 
impact on the pro ﬁ t or loss of the Group. The Group’s exposure to derivative contracts is monitored on regular basis 
as part of its overall risk management framework. The Group’s derivative assets and ﬁn ancial liabilities are generally 
not offset in the statement of ﬁn ancial position unless the IFRS netting criteria are met. 
24.1. Derivative financial instruments held or issued for trading purposes
The Group may also take positions with the expectation of pro ﬁ ting from favourable movements in prices, rates or 
indices.
The derivative asset held by the Group was disposed of in the course of reporting period.
24.1.1. Swaps
Swaps are contractual agreements between two parties to exchange streams of payments over time based on speci ﬁed  
notional amounts, in relation to movements in a speci ﬁe d underlying index such as a foreign currency rate . In a 
currency swap (included within foreign exchange contracts), the Group pays a speci ﬁe d amount in one currency and 
receives a speci ﬁe d amount in another currency. Currency swaps are mostly gross settled.
25. Investments (other than securities)
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
2020 2019
Bank Group Bank Group
Listed equity instruments (note 25a)  1,895 2,994 1,895 3,049
Unlisted equity instruments (note 25bi) 438 15,540 332 12,390
 2,333 18,534 2,227 15,439
25a. Listed equity instruments
2020 2019
Bank Group Bank Group
At 1 January 1,895  3,049 3,849 5,035
Changes in fair values -  (55) (1,954) (1,986)
At 31 December 1,895  2,994 1,895 3,049
This represents investments in the ordinary shares of a number of listed companies.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1125
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d25bi. Unlisted equity instruments
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
2020 2019
Bank Group Bank Group
At 1 January 332 12,390 379 38,348
Additions - 7,207 - -
Changes in fair values 106     (4,057) (47) (25,958)
At 31 December 438 15,540 332 12,390
25bii. Fair values of unlisted equity instruments
2020 2019
Ordinary 
sharesBank GroupOrdinary 
sharesBank Group
Fidelity Bank0.05%438 4380.05%332 332
Ghana Community Network5%-  - 5%- 4,201
Vivo Energy Limited9%- 3,463 9%- 3,573
Oasis Africa Fund4.95%- 6,645 9.3%- 4,284
Real Estates Investment Trust PLC9.13%            -  4,994-- -
At 31 December-438  15,540 -332 12,390
26i. Loans and advances to customers
2020 2019
  Bank Group Bank Group
Term loans  3,630,405  3,630,405 3,636,906 3,638,325
Overdrafts 389,910 389,910 300,551 300,551
Staff loans 248,151 248,151 100,315 100,315
Gross loans and advances  4,268,466  4,268,466 4,037,772 4,039,191
Less        
Interest in suspense (57,913)  (57,913) (76,742) (77,531)
Allowance for impairment (597,965)  (597,965) (373,377) (374,007)
Net loans and advances  3,612,588 3,612,588 3,587,653 3,587,653
Current 1,202,816 1,202,816 1,492,751 1,492,751
Non-current 2,409,772 2,409,772 2,094,902 2,094,902
Allowance for impairment        
Balance at 1 January 373,377  374,006 312,612 313,241 
Charge for the year 224,588  224,588 75,023 75,023 
Write offs - - (14,258) (14,258)
Balance at 31 December 597,965  598,594 373,377 374,007
The ﬁf ty largest exposures represents 69% of the loans and advances at the end of the year (2019: 61%). For detailed 
analysis of list per stage, refer to Credit Risk disclosures.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1126
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d26 ii. Advances to banks
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
                     2020 2019
  Bank Group Bank Group
Placement with other banks  203,830  203,830 217,481 217,481
Impairment (2,926) (2,926) (7,867) (7,867)
Balance at 31 December 200,904 200,904 209,614 209,614
Current 200,904 200,904 209,614 209,614
All placement with other banks are short-term and mature less than 3 months after year-end.
Allowance for impairment   
Balance at 1 January 7,867 7,867 7,369 7,369
Charge for the year (4,941) (4,941) 498 498
Balance at 31 December 2,926 2,926 7,867 7,867
For detailed analysis of list per stage, refer to Credit Risk disclosures (Note 6).
27.  Investment securities
               2020 2019
  Bank Group Bank Group
Short - term investments        
Stocks and bonds 3,657,642 3,702,713 1,442,641 1,469,566
Treasury bills  970,108  971,982 1,694,267 1,696,131
  4,627,750 4,674,695 3,136,908 3,165,697
Medium - term investments        
GOG bonds  177,238  177,238 295,397 295,397
Long - term investments        
GOG note 5 years ﬁx ed rate 3,770,913 3,770,913 2,564,288 2,564,288
Balance at 31 December 8,575,901 8,622,846 5,996,593 6,025,382
At 1 January 5,996,593 6,025,382 4,642,042 4,646,034
Additions 24,842,884 24,881,397 13,604,559 13,630,319
Disposals (22,263,576) (22,283,933) (12,250,008) (12,250,971)
8,575,901 8,622,846 5,996,593 6,025,382
Current 1,346,746 1,348,746 1,958,427 1,971,104
Non-current 7,229,155 7,274,100 4,038,166 4,054,278
28. Investments in subsidiary
GCB Capital Limited formerly known as GCB Securities Limited, an entity incorporated in Ghana that engages in 
investment banking activities is the only subsidiary of the Bank.
The Bank’s holding in this entity is as set out below:
Bank
Name of company 2020            
% holding 2019                 
% holding 2020                  
Carrying amount 2019                  
Carrying amount 
GCB Capital Limited 100 100 1,000 1,000Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1127
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d29.  Investment in associates 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
         2020     2019
Bank Group Bank Group
At 1 January 28,274 100,391 28,274 81,482
Share of pro ﬁt , net of tax -  (7,566) - 903
Share of OCI - 401 - 2,321
Dividends received from associates - (406) - (2,951)
Exchange differences on translating foreign operation -  (1,211) - 18,524
Interest received from associate - 26 - (49)
Interest paid to associate - 46 - 161
Total at 31 December 28,274 91,681 28,274 100,391
The Bank has one direct associate Ghana International Bank (GHIB) and it considers Ghana International Bank (GHIB) 
as material to the Group. The Bank in addition holds indirect interest of 20%, 25% and 34% in Ghana Textiles Manufacturing Company, Accra Markets Limited and NCR Ghana Limited respectively through its subsidiary.
Associates information
Country of 
incorporationMethod % Ownership         
interest
2020 2019
Ghana International Bank United Kingdom Equity 20% 20%
Ghana Textiles Manufacturing Company Ghana Equity 20% 20%
Accra Markets Limited Ghana Equity 25% 25%
NCR Ghana Limited Ghana Equity 34% 34%
The country of incorporation is the same as the principle place of business for all associates. The percentage voting rights is equal to the percentage ownership for all associates.
Ghana International Bank is a strategic investment that facilitates the Group’s international trade.
Summarised financial information of material associates
Summarised Statement of Pro ﬁ t or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income                       
 2020  2019
Revenue 103,657 150,853
Proﬁt /(Loss) from continuing operations (37,409) 4,295
Other comprehensive income/(loss) 2,003 11,607
Total comprehensive income (35,406) 15,902
Attributable to investee’s shareholders (35,406) 15,902Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1128
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d29.  Investment in associates (cont’d)
Summarised Statement of Financial Position         
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
 2020  2019
Assets
Current 5,348,434 4,437,035
Non-current 529,541 494,819
Total assets 5,877,975 4,931,854
Liabilities
Current  4,826,254 3,916,564
Noncurrent 56,477 12,928
Total liabilities  4,882,731 3,929,492
Net assets  995,244 1,002,362     
Attributable to investee’s shareholders  995,244 1,002,362     
Group’s interest in net assets  199,049   200,472               
Carrying amount  91,681 100,391          
30.  Property, equipment and right-of-use assets
Bank
Cost Leasehold 
land & 
buildingsFurniture &  
equipmentMotor 
vehiclesComputers Right of 
use 
assetsCapital 
work in  
progressTotal
Balance as at 1 January 2020 155,021 221,020 18,529 154,011 20,709 22,997 592,287
Addition 830 8,334 3,932 11,401 13,800 43,792 82,089
Disposals - (446) (2750) - -  -(3,196)
Write off - (230) - (11) -  (172) (413)
Transfers 21,429 2351 623 18,625 - (43,028) -
Balance at 31 December 
2020177,280 231,029 20,334 184,026 34,509 23,589 670,767
Accumulated depreciation              
1 Jan 2020 22,124 164,648 14,008 115,526 5,435 -321,741
Charge for the year 5,098 28,009 2,783 22,964 12,513 - 71,367
Disposal - (213) (2,092) - -   - (2,305)
Write Off - (39) -  (10) -  - (49)
Balance at 31 December 
202027,222 192,405 14,699 138,480 17,948 -390,754
Net book value              
Balance as at 31 December 
2020150,058 38,624 5,635 45,546 16,561 23,589 280,013Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1129
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d30.  Property, equipment and right-of-use assets (cont’d)
Bank
Cost Leasehold 
land & 
buildingsFurniture & 
equipmentMotor 
vehiclesComputersRight of 
use assetsCapital 
work in 
progressTotal
Balance as at 1 January 2019        135,989  200,584   19,203  121,952 20,709   18,849  517,286
Addition 9,752 19,546 208 24,514 - 58,370   112,390
Disposals - - (761) - - - (761)
Transfers to GCB Capital Ltd (112) (99) - (41) - - (252)
Write off - - (122) - - (275) (397)
Transfers 9,392 989 - 7,587 -(52,847) (34,879)
Balance at 31 December 2019 155,021 221,020 18,528 154,012 20,709 24,097 593,387
Accumulated depreciation 
1 January 2019 17,776 136,291 11,399 93,864 - -259,330
Charge for the year 4,348 28,436 3,333 21,703 5,434 -63,254
Disposal - - (602) - - - (602)
Transfer to GCB Capital Ltd (72) - (39) - - (111)
Write Off - (7) (122) - - (129)
Balance at 31 December 2019 22,124 164,648 14,008 115,528 5,434 -321,742
Net book value
Balance as at 31 December 
2019132,897 56,372 4,520 38,484 15,275 24,097 271,645
Group
Cost Leasehold     
land &   
buildingsFurniture &  
equipmentMotor 
vehiclesComputers Right of 
use 
assetsCapital 
work in  
progressTotal
Balance as at 1 January 2019 155,133 221,209 19,024 154,117 20,709 22,997 593,189
Addition 933 8,334 3,932 11,430 13800 43,792   82,221
Disposals - (446) (2,750) - - - (3,196)
Write off - (230) - (11) -    (172)   (413)
Transfers 21,429 2351 623 18,625 -(43,028) -
Balance at 31 December 2020 177,495 231,218 20,829 184,161 34,509 23,589 671,801
Accumulated depreciation
1 January 2020 22,126 164,736 14,075 115,576 5,434 -321,947
Charge for the year 5,101 28,042 2,907 22,992 12,513 - 71,555
Disposal - (214) (2,092) - - -(2,306)
Write Off - (39) (10) - -     (49)
Balance at 31 December 2020 27,227 192,525 14,890 138,558 17,947 -391,147
Net book value    
Balance as at 31 December 
2020150,268 38,693 5,939 45,603 16,562 23,589 280,654Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1130
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d30.  Property, equipment and right-of-use assets (cont’d)
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Group
Cost Leasehold 
land & 
buildingsFurniture & 
equipmentMotor 
vehiclesComputersRight of 
use assetCapital 
work in 
progressTotal
Balance as at 1 January /2019  135,989  200,584  19,203  121,952 20,709  18,849 517,286
Addition 9,752 19,636 704 24,578 - 58,370 113,040
Disposals - - (761) - - - (761)
Write off - - (122) - - (275) (397)
Transfers 9,392 989 - 7,587 -(52,847) (34,879)
Balance at 31 December 2019 155,133 221,209 19,024 154,117 20,709 24,097 594,289
Accumulated depreciation 
1 January 2019 17,776 136,291 11,399 93,864 - -259,330
Charge for the year 4,350 28,463 3,400 21,714 5,434 - 63,361
Disposal - - (602) - - - (602)
Write Off - (18) (122) (2) - - (142)
Balance at 31 December 2019 22,126 164,736 14,075 115,576 5,434 -321,947
Net book value
Balance as at 31 December 2019 133,007 56,473 4,949 38,541 15,275 24,097 272,342
There was no indication of impairment of property and equipment held by the Group at 31 December 2020 (2019:Nil). 
None of the property and equipment of the Group had been pledged as security for liabilities and there were no restrictions on the title of any of the Group’s property and equipment at the reporting date and at the end of the 
previous year. 
31.  Intangible assets
Bank CWIP Software Customer 
relationshipTotal
Cost
Balance at 1 January 2020 48,607 202,863 95,306 346,776
Additions 82,747 64,971 - 147,718
Transfers (87,517) - -  (87,517)
Balance at 31 December 2020 43,837  267,834 95,306 406,977
Accumulated amortisation
Balance at 1 January 2020 - 106,834 38,122 144,956
Charge for the year - 52,039 19,061 71,100
Balance at 31 December 2020 - 158,873 57,183 216,056
Carrying amounts
Balance at 31 December 2020 43,837 108,961 38,123 190,921Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1131
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d31.  Intangible assets (cont’d)
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Bank CWIP Software Customer 
relationshipTotal
Cost        
Balance at 1 January 2019 16,502 162,142 95,306 273,950
Additions 68,168 40,721 - 108,889
Transfer (36,063) - -  (36,063)
Balance at 31 December 2019 48,607 202,863 95,306 346,776
Accumulated amortisation
Balance at 1 January 2019 - 63,988 19,061 83,049
Charge for the year - 42,846 19,061 61,907
Balance at 31 December 2019 - 106,834 38,122 144,956
Carrying amounts
Balance at 31 December 2019 48,607 96,029 57,184 201,820
Group CWIP Software Customer 
relationshipTotal
Cost        
Balance at 1 January 2020 48,607 202,863 95,306 346,776
Additions 82,865 65,073 - 147,938
Transfers (87,517) -  - (87,517)
Balance at 31 December 2020 43,955  267,936 95,306 407,197
Accumulated amortisation
Balance at 1 January 2020 - 106,834 38,122 144,956
Charge for the year - 52,044 19,061 71,105
Balance at 31 December 2020 - 158,878 57,183 216,061
Carrying amounts
Balance at 31 December 2020 43,955 109,058 38,123 191,136
Group CWIP Software Customer 
relationshipTotal
Cost        
Balance at 1 January 2019 16,502 162,142 95,306 273,950
Additions 68,168 40,721 - 108,889
Transfer (36,063) - -  (36,063)
Balance at 31 December 2019 48,607 202,863 95,306 346,776
Accumulated amortisation        
Balance at 1 January 2019 - 63,988 19,061 83,049
Charge for the year - 42,846 19,061 61,907
Balance at 31 December 2019 - 106,834 38,122 144,956
Carrying amounts
Balance as at 31 December 2019 48,607 96,029 57,184 201,820Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1132
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d31. Intangible assets (cont’d)
Intangible assets represent licenses for computer software and customer relationship. There was no indication of 
impairment of intangible assets held by the Group at the reporting date and at the end of the previous year.
32. Other Assets
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
2020 2019
Bank Group Bank Group
Account receivables 346,234   348,486 265,788 265,788
Prepayments  114,198  114,215 34,753 34,767
  460,432 462,701 300,541 300,555
Included in other assets is an amount of GHS 20 million representing cash collateral held by Bank of Ghana (BoG) for 
the issuance of electronic money (G-Money).
33 (i) Deposits from banks & other financial institutions
2020 2019
Bank Group Bank Group
Current account 484,964 484,964 280,103 280,103
Time deposits 130,454 130,454 221,808 221,808
  615,418 615,418 501,911 501,911
Current 615,418 615,418 501,911 501,911
33 (ii) Deposits from customers 
2020 2019
  Bank Group Bank Group
Current account  4,830,456  4,823,178 3,913,484 3,893,754
Savings deposits  4,673,945  4,673,945 3,994,136 3,994,136
Time deposits  1,848,117  1,848,117 1,432,988 1,432,988
   11,352,518  11,345,240 9,340,608 9,320,878
Current 11,298,063 11,290,785 9,317,007 9,297,277
Non-current 54,455 54,455 23,601 23,601
The twenty largest depositors made up 14.37% of total deposits at the end of the year (2019:19.37%).
34.  Other liabilities
2020 2019
Bank Group Bank Group
Creditors  204,760 204,760 217,474 217,474
Accruals  57,757 58,313 27,718 27,904
Other liabilities  159,064 158,321 91,041 90,296
   421,581 421,394 336,233 335,674
Current  421,581 421,394 336,233 335,674
Included in other liabilities is an amount of GHS10.4 million being provision for legal actions brought against the Bank 
by customers and its employees.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1133
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d35.  Borrowings
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
The Group and Bank 2020 2019
At 1 January 457,578 344,884
Additions 3,872,019 6,932,690
Repayments    (3,557,072) (6,819,996)
  772,525 457,578
Comprising:  
Bank of Ghana 399,384 189,887
Exim Bank (EDAIF)  - 2,354
First National Bank (FNB) 35,000 -
First Atlantic Bank 26,518 -
Consolidated Bank Ghana Limited  - 10,000
Girsal Limited Ghana  - 200,000
HFC Bank (Ghana) Ltd  - 27,669
National Investment Bank  - 27,668
Cal Bank 100,000 -
Fidelity Bank 30,000 -
Agricultural Development Bank 20,000 -
Ghana Amalgamated Trust Plc 40,000 -
Teachers Fund 34,019 -
Standard Chartered Bank 15,000 -
Zenith Bank Ghana Ltd 32,627 -
United Bank for Africa 39,977 -
  772,525 457,578
36.  Employee  benefit obligations
The Group and Bank 2020 2019
Post-employment de ﬁne d bene ﬁt  plan (a)  110,599 116,230
Other long-term employee bene ﬁt  (b)  2,723 2,434
   113,322 118,664
Postemployment defined and other longterm benefit plan 
Apart from the legally required social security scheme, the Bank contributes to the following postemployment de ﬁn ed 
bene ﬁ t plans and other longterm employee bene ﬁ t plan. These plans expose the Bank to actuarial risks, such as 
longevity risk, interest rate risk and market (investment risk).
Other longterm employee benefit planPlan A  long service awards accrue to employees based on graduated periods of uninterrupted service. These awards 
accrue over the service life of employees. Employees in service with the Bank after ﬁf teen (15) years become eligible 
to receive cash payments at graduated rates when employees achieve stipulated milestones set by the Bank. The terms 
of settlement of long service award is based on the achievement of every milestone. Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1134
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d36.  Employee  benefit obligations  (cont’d)
Postemployment defined benefit plan
• Plan B  The Bank pays monthly pension bene ﬁ ts to retired employees, under a closed de ﬁn ed bene ﬁ t pension 
scheme. Under this scheme, bene ﬁc iaries are paid pensions equal to 60% of the net basic salaries of their serving 
counterparts.
• Plan C  The Bank also pays postretirement medical care for its retired staff and their dependents below 18 years 
of age.
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Movements for the year 2020 2019
At 1 January  116,230 95,381
Net expense recognised in pro ﬁt o r loss  23,547 18,926
Other comprehensive income (14,192) 16,528
Other (14,986) (14,605)
   110,599 116,230
Net expense recognised in profit or loss    
Current service cost 579 501
Interest expense / (income)  22,968 18,425
   23,547 18,926
Included in other comprehensive income    
Re-measurement of loss/(gain)
Actuarial loss/(gain) arising from:
Financial assumptions  7,252 6,198
Experience (21,444) 10,330
  (14,192) 16,528
Other    
Bene ﬁ ts paid (14,986) (14,604)
Net movement (5,631) 20,850
Balance at 31 December represented by:
Net de ﬁne d bene ﬁt  liability (Plan B) 74,313 83,811
Net de ﬁne d bene ﬁt  liability (Plan C) 36,286 32,419
  110,599 116,230
Other long-term employee benefitsMovement for the year 2020 2019
At 1 January  2,434 2,265 
Net expense recognised in pro ﬁt o r loss 693  614 
Actuarial gains/loss recognised in pro ﬁt o r loss (271)  44 
Other (133) (489)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1135
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d36.  Employee  benefit obligations (cont’d)
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Movements for the year 2020 2019
At 31 December  2,723 2,434 
Movement for the year
Net expense recognised in profit or loss
Current service cost 162  160 
Interest expense/(income) 531  454 
693  614 
Included in profit or lossRe-measurement of loss/(gain)
Actuarial loss/(gain) arising from:Actuarial loss/(gain) arising from:Financial assumptions 77 (20)
Experience (348)  64 
(271)  44 
Other
Bene ﬁ ts paid (133) (489)
The following are the principal actuarial assumptions at the reporting date: 
Discount rates used 20.00% 21.00%
Future salary growth 15.00% 15.00%
Rate of inflation 8.50% 9.50%
Medical inflation 12.00% 11.50%
Future pension growth 15.00% 15.00%
Sensitivity analysis (Combined schemes)
Reasonably possible changes at the reporting date to any of the relevant actuarial assumptions, holding other 
assumptions constant, would have affected the de ﬁne d bene ﬁt  obligation by the following amounts shown below:
2020 2019
  Increase Decrease Increase Decrease
Discount rate (2% movement) (11,237) 14,169 (10,705) 13,217
Future pension growth (2% movement) 7,311 (6,383) 8,142 (7,075)
Medical inflation (2% movement) 7,313 (5,468) 6,300 (4,784)
Although the analysis does not take account of the full distribution of cash flows expected under the plans, it does 
provide an approximation of the sensitivity of the assumptions shown.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1136
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d37. Capital and reserves
i. Stated Capital
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
2020 2019
Authorised: Number  
(000)Value Number  
(000)Value
Ordinary shares of no par value 1,500,000 - 1,500,000 -
Issued:
Issued for cash 115,000 60,030 115,000 60,030
Transfer from Retained Earnings 86,500 438,343 86,500 438,343
Capitalisation of reserves 1,000 2 1,000 2
Transfer from other surplus 62,500 1,625 62,500 1,625
265,000 500,000 265,000 500,000
There is no unpaid liability and no call or instalment unpaid on any share. There is no share in treasury.
ii. Statutory reserve fund
Statutory reserve represents cumulative amounts set aside from annual pro ﬁ ts after tax required under the Banking 
Act. The proportion of net pro ﬁ ts transferred to reserves ranges from 12.5% to 50% of net pro ﬁ t after tax, depending 
on the relationship that the balance on statutory reserves bears to paid-up capital.
iii. Regulatory Credit risk reserveCredit risk reserve represents the cumulative balance of amounts transferred from/to retained earnings to meet gaps 
in impairment allowances based on Bank of Ghana’s provisioning guidelines and IFRS.
2020 2019
Credit risk reserves - Loans and advances Bank Group Bank Group
IFRS impairment 517,838 517,838 381,244 381,244
Bank of Ghana provision 346,462 346,462 277,427 277,427
Excess of BOG provision over IFRS impairment - - - -
Total credit risk reserve                  -            -                   - -
iv. Fair value reserves
The fair value reserve comprises the cumulative net change in the fair value of equity instruments until the assets are 
derecognised or impaired.
v. Other reservesOther reserves represent actuarial gains and losses on pension obligations and foreign currency differences arising 
from the translation of the ﬁn ancial statements of foreign operations.
2020 2019
  Bank Group Bank Group
At 1 January (43,073) (10,188) (30,677) (16,316)
Actuarial (loss)/ gain 14,192  14,192 (16,528) (16,528)
Deferred tax on actuarial loss (3,548) (3,548) 4,132 4,132
Foreign currency translation differences on foreign 
operations- (1,211) - 18,524
At 31 December (32,429) (755) (43,073) (10,188)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1137
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d38.  Contingent liabilities and commitments
Off balance sheet items
As with other banks, the Group engages in business activities involving acceptances, performance bonds and 
indemnities. The majority of these facilities are offset by corresponding obligations of third parties, the nominal 
amounts of which are not reflected in the statements of ﬁn ancial position.
Nature of instruments
An acceptance is an undertaking by a Bank to pay a bill of exchange drawn on a customer. The Bank expects most 
acceptances to be presented, but reimbursement by the customer is normally immediate.
Other contingent liabilities include transaction related customs and performance bonds and are generally shortterm 
commitments to third parties.
Commitments to lend to a customer in the future are made subject to certain conditions. Such commitments are either 
made for a ﬁx ed period or agreed maturity dates but are cancellable by the lender subject to notice requirements. 
Documentary credits commit the Bank to make payments to third parties on the production of documents, which are 
usually reimbursed immediately by customers. Customers are required to deposit cash in a margin account in respect of documentary and commercial letters of credit.
The following summarize the nominal principal amounts of contingent liabilities and commitments with offbalance 
sheet risks.
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
2020 2019
  Bank Group Bank Group
Guarantees and indemnities  383,336 383,336 598,280 598,280
Documentary and commercial letters of credit  314,999 314,999 265,999 265,999
   698,335 698,335 864,279 864,279
Commitments
Loan commitments 429,723  429,723 473,040 473,040
   1,128,058  1,128,058 1,337,319 1,337,319
Legal proceedings
The Bank is defending a number of pending legal actions brought against it as at 31 December 2020. Some of these 
cases have been brought against the Bank by former employees, customers and others.
Melville Enterprise SA and GCB Bank Ltd & Others
The Receivers ﬁl ed an application in the Supreme Court in the name of UT Bank (in Receivership) following GCB Bank’s 
notiﬁc ation to the Bank of Ghana and the Receivers about the High Court ruling. Their Lordships by a unanimous 
decision of 5:0 quashed the ruling of the High Court, which had ordered GCB Bank to pay the said amount to the 
Registrar.
The plaintiff, Melville, dissatis ﬁe d with the Supreme Court’s unanimous decision, applied for a review of the decision. 
The Supreme Court on 27th March 2019 struck out the application for review following a request by Melville to withdraw their application for review. On April 8, 2019, The High Court granted Melville an order to examine the judgment debtor (i.e. originally UT Bank and now the Joint Receivers and GCB). Pursuant to this order, three (3) persons 
namely the Governor of the Bank of Ghana or his representative, the Joint Receivers and the Airport City Branch 
Manager of GCB were in Court for the said examination. The High Court on February 7, 2020 delivered its ruling after the examination of the judgment debtors and ordered that GCB pays the Plaintiff the said US$7.43m. The High Court 
has since stayed its decision to enable the Bank contest its decision in the Court of Appeal. The Bank has since ﬁl ed its 
notice of appeal in the Court of Appeal seeking for a reversal of the ruling given by the High Court requesting the Bank to pay the USD 7.43m to the Registrar of the Court following the assumption of UT Bank.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1138
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d38.  Contingent liabilities and commitments (cont’d)
Legal proceedings (cont’d)
Melville Enterprise SA and GCB Bank Ltd & Others (cont’d)
Management believes that its appeal in the Court of Appeal will be successful as there is evidence on the records of 
the High Court by the Joint Receivers that the claim by Melville should be directed to the Joint Receivers for settlement 
and not GCB. Furthermore, the Supreme Court in its previous decision of July 17th 2018 quashed an earlier ruling of 
the High Court and clearly stated that the order of the High Court dated 2/2/2018 to GCB to pay the said amount was against the provisions of section 128 (c) of Act 930.  There is no need to provide for it.  
The Vessel MT Sylla & Anor V GCB Bank Limited
The second case also involved a vessel and its owners, who had instituted legal action against the then UT Bank, UT 
Financial Services Limited and Morgan Energy Limited under charter party agreement for wrongful arrest of their vessel, with potential liabilities of USD1.64 million. The High Court in Nigeria on 4th July 2016 dismissed the case 
against UT Bank and two other persons, but the vessel and its owners dissatis ﬁe d with the High Court’s judgment 
appealed to the Court of Appeal. The appeal was pending against ex-UT Bank before the Purchase & Assumption arrangement was entered into. Following the withdrawal of UT Bank’s licence in August 2017, the appellant obtained an order to substitute GCB for UT Bank. GCB resisted this motion but the Court of Appeal of Nigeria substituted both 
GCB and the Joint Receivers in place of UT Bank. GCB has appealed against this interlocutory ruling substituting it to 
the Supreme Court of Nigeria. The case is currently pending before the Supreme Court of Nigeria. No date has been 
ﬁx ed for the hearing of the appeal against the substitution yet.  
Meanwhile the appeal by the appellant (the Vessel MT Sylla) against the decision of the High Court dismissing the case of wrongful arrest is also pending before the Court of Appeal in Nigeria. The Court of Appeal is set to hear this matter on 22 April, 2022.
Based on legal advice, the amount has not been provided for on the grounds that the Bank is indemni ﬁe d of all 
liabilities that may arise outside the purchase and assumption agreement.
Perfect Estates Limited V GCB Bank Limited The plaintiff’s claim against the Bank is for rent arrears from July 2018 till date at USD 11,698 per month, alleging Bank 
vacated the property of the plaintiff in Kumasi. The plaintiff further claims for arrears of service charges at GHS 1,615 per 
month from March 2016 as well as USD 10,000 for property damage plus interest on all the amounts being claimed. 
Parties have ﬁl ed their respective pleadings and processes and the court has set down the issues for trial. The court has 
further ordered the ﬁl ing of the respective witness statements by the parties which has been complied by both parties.
The Bank is of the opinion that the Plaintiff had already lodged a proof of debt with the Joint Receivers, which is the 
right thing to do, as the Bank never stepped into the shoes of the ex-Capital bank as a tenant to the said property. 
Plaintiff V UT Holdings and GCB Bank Limited The Plaintiff sued the Defendants at the Kumasi High Court (Commercial Division) jointly and severally for the following:
• An order for recovery of cash the sum of GHS 2.85 million, being Plaintiff’s investments with the defendants 
which amounts they have refused to refund despite demands; and 
• Interest on the said amount at the prevailing interest rate from 11 December 2017 to the date of ﬁn al payment.
Although the Bank’s defence is that it assumed UT Bank Limited and not UT Holdings Limited, which is a separate legal 
entity and still a going-concern, the court has given directions for GCB Bank to ﬁl e witness statements for Case 
Management Conference to be held.
All the records available to the Bank indicate that the investments at stake were done by UT Bank, with the tacit 
approval of the Plaintiff, at UT Holdings. UT Holdings, the ﬁr st Defendant, is the appropriate party to pay the plaintiff  
any amount that is due on its investment. Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1139
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’dEastern Alloys V GCB Bank & World Prayer Centre
The Plaintiff is seeking the following reliefs from the defendants:
• A declaration that the 1st and 2nd Defendants knew that the destroyed machines were not the subject matter of 
the facility which was ﬁn ally auctioned in satisfaction of the judgment debt;
• A declaration that the 1st and 2nd Defendants conduct in appropriating and/or destruction of the Plaintiffs 
machines and office equipment is unlawful and in clear breach of duty of care and that they ought to make good the resultant damage;
• Recovery of about  sixty-four million United States Dollars (USD 64 million), being the total sum of unlawful destruction and / or appropriation of Plaintiffs machines, chemicals and office equipment;
• Interest on the said sum at the prevailing commercial bank rate from February 2012 to the date of ﬁn al payment;
• Damages for trespass against the Defendants; and
• Costs including legal fees and any other relief(s) that the Court deem ﬁt.
The Bank is contesting the estimated potential liability to the Bank as stated in the claim. The Bank is con ﬁd ent in its 
defence as the ﬁg ures the Plaintiff is claiming have to be proved with documentary evidence. The execution of the 
judgment debt was not deemed wrongful.  
Plaintiff V Capital Bank and GCB Bank Limited Plaintiff’s claim is for general damages of GHS 70 million for its breach of duty of care and general damages of GHS 
30 million for defamation for dishonoured cheques and cost including legal fees. The Bank has ﬁl ed conditional 
appearance and statement of defence. The Bank has also ﬁl ed a motion to strike out the suit against it because the 
Bank is not the proper party to the suit.Court stayed proceedings against the Receivers and the Bank and summons of directions against the 4th Defendant 
was taken on 11 February 2020. The Court urged Plaintiff and 4th Defendant to try an amicable resolution of issues at 
stake failing which the case would take its normal course against the 4th Defendant. No date has been ﬁx ed hearing 
yet.
Management is con ﬁd ent of winning this case as the issues set out for trial is a matter between plaintiff and the 4th 
Defendant for which the court has already directed that the two parties to try amicable settlement of same.
39.  Related parties
a. T ransactions with executive directors and key management personnel
Key management personnel are de ﬁn ed as those persons having authority and responsibility for planning, directing 
and controlling the activities of the Group (directly or indirectly) and comprise the Directors and Senior Management 
of GCB Bank Limited.
There were no material transactions with companies in which a Director or other members of key management 
personnel (or any connected person) is related except for Dannex Aryton Starwin PLC of which Mr. Nik Amart ﬁo a 
Non-Executive Director of the Bank holds shares. As at the reporting date Dannex Aryton Starwin PLC has a loan of 
GHS 16.66m in the books of the Bank.
Remuneration of Executive Directors and other key management personnel
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2020 2019
Salaries and other short-term bene ﬁt s 16,506 10,383
Post-employment bene ﬁt s 1,896 709
  18,402 11,092
Remuneration of the Executive Directors during the year amounted to GHS 7.62m. (2019: GHS 3.35m).Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1140
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements  cont’d39.  Related parties
a. T ransactions with executive directors and key management personnel (cont’d)
Details of transactions and balances between the Bank and Executive Directors and other key management personnel 
are as follows:
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Loans 2020 2019
Loans outstanding at 1 January 1,958 2,328
Net movement  505 (370)
Loans outstanding at 31 December 2,463 1958
Interest income  138 113
Deposits
Deposits at 1 January 604 534
Net movement during the year 444 70
Deposits at 31 December 1,048 604
Interest expense 98 74
Loans to executive directors and key management personnel which include housing, car and other personal loans are 
given under terms that are no more favourable than those given to other staff. No impairment has been recognised in respect of loans granted to executive directors and key management personnel at 31 December 2020. The housing 
and car loans are secured by the underlying assets. All other loans are unsecured. No individual director has a loan 
amount more than 1% of the stated capital. The total loan amount of the directors is also less than 1% of the stated capital. No individual staff member has a loan amount more than 2% of the stated capital. 
b. T ransactions with nonexecutive directors
No loans were advanced to nonexecutive directors during the year. There were no balances outstanding on account of loans due from nonexecutive directors at the year end.
Fees and allowances paid to nonexecutive directors during the year amounted to GHS 3.62m (2019: GHS 3.21m).
c. T ransactions and balances with subsidiary
GCB Capital Limited Fixed deposit investments are placed with the Bank. The subsidiary’s current account is held with the Bank. Interest 
accrues on these placements at normal commercial rates. Balances due to/from the subsidiary at the year end were as follows:
Other Assets 2020 2019
Amounts due from subsidiary in respect of unpaid expenses - 50
Deposits
Current account 7,278 19,729
The Bank entered into the following transactions with its subsidiary:
2020 2019
Management fees - 1,337Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1141
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d39. Related parties (cont’d)
d. Bal ances and transactions with associates
Balances due to/from associates at year-end were as follows:
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
2020 2019
Current account balances (Foreign) 76,372 72,584
The Group entered into the following transactions with its associates:
Dividend received  406 2,951
Interest received on current account balances (foreign) (132) 243
Interest paid on current account balances (foreign) (228) (803)
Government of Ghana
The Government of Ghana directly holds 21.36% shares in GCB Bank Limited and 29.89% indirectly through its 
shareholding in SSNIT. The total of its direct and indirect shareholding is 51.25%.
40.  Subsequent events
There was no signi ﬁc ant event after the reporting period. However, the presence of COVID 19 requires management 
to continue to assess the impact of the pandemic on the Group’s operations. During the year, the Bank conducted an 
extensive assessment on the Impact and have provided information on their assessment as part of the director’s report. Refer to the Report of the Directors for the impact of COVID-19 on the Group.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1142 GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020Appendix I-Value Added Statement
41.  Value added statements for the year ended 31 December 2020
2020    2019
  Bank Group Bank Group
Interest earned and other operating income  2,412,485 2,435,239  1,988,034  1,990,518 
Direct cost of Services (896,131) (906,980)  (740,354)  (740,618)
Value added by banking services  1,516,354 1,528,259  1,247,680 1,249,900 
Non-banking income 7,600  14,374  14,388  22,070 
Impairments  (219,647)  (219,647)  (75,521)  (75,521)
Value added  1,304,307  1,322,986  1,186,547  1,196,449 
Distributed as follows:  1,304,307 1,322,986  1,186,547  1,196,449 
To Employees:
Non-Executive Directors 3,619  3,698  3,209  3,288 
Executives directors 7,616  8,358  3,345  3,537 
Other employees 548,715  549,877  490,178  490,686 
559,950 561,933  496,732 497,511
To Government:Income tax 162,388  165,437  143,650  145,211 
To providers of capitalDividend to shareholders  53,000  53,000  79,500  79,500 
To expansion and growth:Depreciation and amortisation 142,467 142,660  125,161  125,269 
Retained Earnings 357,855 361,097  348,311 349,980
42.   Corporate social responsibility
The Group recognises its social responsibilities to improve the wellbeing of the society and is committed to being a 
responsible citizen, and believes in giving back to society. A total of GHS 8.04m (fall 22% from 2019: GHS 10.43m) was spent under the Group’s social responsibility programme with key focus on areas of Education, Health, Culture, Tourism, 
Environment and Sports.
The Group undertook several projects during the year under review. Some of the notable initiatives undertaken within 
the period include the rehabilitation of Ussher Polyclinic, the renovation of the Judicial Service Clinic in Kumasi, health screening for three communities which includes Chorkor, Agbogbloshie and Kokompe. We sponsored  the feeding of over 650 medical doctors and other frontline health workers in Ussher Polyclinic, Mamprobi Polyclinic, University of Ghana Medical Centre and Ga East Municipal Hospital during March-April 2020 lockdown.
The Bank donated Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) to some Government Institutions (Ministry of Sanitation, 
Judicial Service of Ghana, National Board for Small Scale Industries as well as donation to the Catalytic Community 
Empowerment Foundation to help ﬁg ht Covid-19 in the West Mamprusi Municipality. The Bank also donated to the 
Upper West Regional Health Directorate towards the ﬁg ht against Cerebrospinal Meningitis (CSM) outbreak. Donations 
were also made in the form of computers and printer to Ho Technical University. The Bank also offered ﬁn ancial 
support to Ghana’s Fastest Human, 2020.Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1143
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1Appendix II-Shareholders’ Information-Unaudited
43.  Analysis of shareholding as at the year-end 2020
No. of 
ShareholdersHolders % No. of Shares % of Holding
1 - 1,000 84,996 92.43 18,388,787 6.94
1001 - 5,000 6,017 6.54 13,184,765 4.98
5001 - 10,000 539 0.59 3,978,783 1.50
Above 10,000 402 0.44 229,447,665 86.58
91,954 100.00 265,000,000 100
Directors’ Shareholdings
 The Director named below held the following number of shares in the Bank as at 31 December 2020:
No. of shares % of Holding
Edward Prince Amoatia Younge 9,000 0.0034
43a.  Analysis of shareholding as at the year-end 2020
No. Names No. of shares % of Holding
1.SOCIAL SECURITY AND NATIONAL INSURANCE TRUST 79,199,550 29.89
2.GOVERNMENT OF GHANA C/O MINISTRY OF FINANCE 56,608,613 21.36
3.OFORI, DANIEL 19,847,154 7.49
4.SCGN/JPMBLSA RE:SKAGEN K-T. VERDIPAPIRFO 16,635,104 6.28
5.6275J, SCGN/PICTET AFRICA NON TAX 6275J PICTETMAST 7,604,968 2.87
6.SCGN/NTGS SE LUX CL A/C RE LUDP RE: AIF CL 8% 3,880,067 1.46
7.GCB STAFF PROVIDENT FUND 2,996,695 1.13
8.SCGN/SSBTC FOR CHANGE GLBL FRONTIER MKTS 2,373,685 0.90
9. STD NOMS/BNYM RE FRONTURA GLOBAL FRONTIER FUND LLC 2,200,000 0.83
10. SCGN / ENTERPRISE LIFE ASS. CO. POLICY HOLDERS 1,932,993 0.73
11.GHANA REINSURANCE COMPANY LTD GENERAL BUSINESS 1,799,651 0.68
12.GHANA COCOA BOARD 1,600,000 0.60
13.STD NOMS/EATON VANCE COLL. INV TRUST FOR EMP BEN 1,577,818 0.60
14. SCGN/’EPACK INVESTMENT FUND LIMITED TRANSACTION E I F L 1,531,200 0.58
15.SCGN/CITIBANK KUWAIT INV AUTHORITY 1,503,600 0.57
16. SCGN/SSB EATON VANCE STRUCTURED EMERGING MARKET FUND 1,434,648 0.54
17.SCGN/SSB EATON VANCE TAXMANAGED EMERGING MARKET FUND 1,285,170 0.48
18. KROHNE FUND 1,000,000 0.38
19. TEMA OIL REFINERY (TOR) LIMITED 1,000,000 0.38
20. AFRICAN TIGER HOLDING LIMITED 995,782 0.38
Top 20 shareholders 207,006,698 78.12
  Others 57,993,302 21.88
  Grand Total 265,000,000 100.00Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1145
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020UNITED KINGDOM
UnityLink Financial Services Ltd. 158-160 Balham High Road
London SW12 9BN
Head OfficeTel: 0044-20-87722160
Fax: 0044- 20- 86753-284
0044-20-82397-125
Email: unitylinkmoney@aol.co.
SPAIN
Money Exchange, S.A P. Santa Maria de la Cabeza
12 28045 Madrid SpainTel: +34917617170www.moneyspain.netEmail: pnovoa@moneyexchange.net
Skype: money.exchange.eur
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
MoneyGram International
Money Transfer
MoneyGram Payment Systems Inc.1550 Utica Avenue SouthMinneapolis, MN 55416 USAEmail: www.moneygram.comTel: +17203625024
Vigo Remittance Corp. 100 Summit AveMontvaleNew Jersey 07645, USA Tel: +1-201-263-5949
Familylink Money Transfer Inc.Transfers Inc. USA1205 College AvenueBronx N.Y. 10456, USATel: 001 718 293 6280Email : familylink@mns.com
Western Union
Western Union Laroc.Centro EmpresarialForum 2, Santa Ana. San JoseCosta Rica Tel: +1-201-263-5049
RIA Money Transfer 6565 Knott Avenue
Buena ParkCalifornia 90620
U.S.A.Tel: +1 5623452632
SFB Capital Systems LLC 1031 Sterling RoadSuite 201, Herndon
Virginia 20170U.S.A.Tel: + 1 7035996975
Transfast Remittance LLC 44 Wall Street, New York
NY 10005
U.S.A.Tel: +1 2123821632Agents / Correspondent Banks
MTOs/AgentsBoar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1146
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1LONDON
Ghana International Bank Plc 67 Cheapside, 1st Floor
Regina House
London EC2V 6AZ England
BIC: GHIBGB2L
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Citibank N.A. 16th Floor, Zone Street
New York, N.Y. 10043, USA
BIC: CITIUS33
EUROPE
Commerzbank AG Kaiserstrasse 16 60261
Frankfurt AM Main
GermanyBIC: COBADEFF
BHF Bank AG Frankfurt AM MainGermanyBIC: BHFBDEFF
AFRICA
Stanbic Bank S.A.
Immeuble Stanbic Bank7 eme etageBoulevard Valery Giscard 
d’Estaing
26 B.P. 701 Abidjan 26Cote d’IvoireBIC: SBICCIABAgents / Correspondent Banks  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1147
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1List of Branches
NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS(DIGITAL ADDRESS) TELEPHONE
ACCRA ZONE
Regional Manager’s Office P.O. Box NT 96, Accra New Town 
areaaccra@gcb.com.gh (GA-183-1907)Mgr: 0302-249772/222641/0302-225928 
Fax:0302-236671
High Street P. O. Box 2971, Accra                                                                               
highstreetmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0302-662337/0302-672857/0302-
668743
Fax: 0302-673496
Accra New Town P. O. Box NT 96, Accra New Town
accranewtownmgr@gcb.com.gh (GA-045-6621)Mgr: 0302-236935/0302- 
222641/0203916587
Fax: 0302-236935
Liberty House P.O. Box 4443, Accra 
libertymgr@gcb.com.gh (GA-141-0278)Mgr:0302-663556/0302-666631-7Fax: 0302-663556
Republic House P.O. Box 5550, Accra-North 
republicmgr@gcb.com.gh (GA-105-1077)Mgr:0302-681810/0302-680355/0302681862
Fax: 0302-681812
Dome P. O Box KW 247, Kwabenya-Atomic 
domemgr@gcb.com.gh (GE-307-1198)Mgr:0302-420039/0302-420041
Ring Road West P. O. Box ST 498, Kaneshie, Accra rrwmgr@gcb.com.gh (GA-216-3530)Mgr:0302-224703/0302-225605/0500404543
Fax: 0302-225270
Kaneshie Market P. O. Box 171, Kaneshie 
kanmktmgr@gcb.com.gh (GA-358-5820)Mgr: 0302-227568/0302-
229005/0577076454
Fax: 0302-227568
Kaneshie Industrial Area P. O. Box AN 12513, Accra North 
kanindmgr@gcb.com.gh (GA-172-2421)Mgr:0302-220551/0302-220591/0289700359
Boundary Road P.O. Box 819, Accra 
boundaryroadmgr@gcb.com.gh (GA-
1065454)Mgr: 0302-682992/0302-682993 
Osu P.O. Box 0212, Osu, Accra (GA-115-6609)
osumgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:020-2011912/0302-782798/9Fax: 0302-782812    
Ministries P.O. Box MB.8, Accra 
ministriesmgr@gcb.com.gh (GA-107-
3312)               Mgr: 0302-673950/ 0302-662170
Fax: 0302-674150Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1148
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS(DIGITAL ADDRESS) TELEPHONE
Korle-Bu P.O. Box 3852, Accra 
korlebumgr@gcb.com.gh (GA-269-1628)Mgr: 0302-666524/0302-666521Fax:0302-666522
Trade Fair Site P.O. Box 198, Trade Fair Centre La 
tradefairmgr@gcb.com.gh (GL-035-3019)Mgr: 0302-774270/0302-778274
Fax: 0302-778275
Burma Camp P.O Box B.C. 268, Burma Camp, Accra  
burmacampmgr@gcb.com.gh (GL-088-0982)                        Mgr:0302-784182
Fax:0302-770341
Makola Market P.O. Box 4832, Accra  
makolamgr@gcb.com.gh (GA-142-9890)   Mgr: 0509677577Fax : 0509677577
Kasoa MainP. O. Box KS 557, Kasoa
kasoamainmgr@gcb.com.gh (CX-000-
9076)Mgr:0302-862430/0302-862429 
Kasoa Market P. O. Box KS 557, Kasoa
kasoamgr@gcb.com.gh (CG-0702-0050)Mgr: 0302-862831-
3/0244570253/0208249987
Kisseiman P. O. Box AT 1946, Achimota kisseimanmgr@gcb.com.gh (GA-344-0742)Mgr:0302-410444/0302-410724
Fax: 0302-410799
Tantra Hill PMB, Achimota Market Post Office 
tantrahillmgr@gcb.com.gh (GW-0845-
2608)Mgr:020-2015795/0302-412817 
Fax:0302-412822
Nima P.O. Box, NM 24, Nimanimamgr@gcb.com.gh (GA-012-9063 )Mgr: 0302-222441/0302-
222439/0508535112
Dansoman PMB 17,Dansoman
dansomanmgr@gcb.com.
gh(GA-539-0336)Mgr:0302-301410 
Fax: 0302-301454
Accra North P.O.Box AN 5206, Accra-North accranorthmgr@gcb.com.gh (GA-100-
9433)Mgr: 0302-253055/0302-223645
Fax: 0302-250245
Abelenkpe PMB, Achimota School Accra 
abelenkpemgr@gcb.com.
gh(GA-091-3739)Mgr:0206889721/0261551941/0547296
708  
Abeka Lapaz                                   P.O. Box AN 5288, Accra North abekalapazmgr@gcb.com.
gh(GA-428-6468)Mgr:0509738320/0540319854List of Branches  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1149
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS(DIGITAL ADDRESS) TELEPHONE
37 Military Hosp. Agency P. O. Box BC 268, Burma Camp Mgr: 0302-784182
Haatso P. O. Box WY 2115, Kwabenya
haatsomgr@gcb.com.gh ()GE-299-2057Mgr: 0303-966759/0303-966760
Amasaman P. O. BoxAM 117, Amasamanamasamanmgr@gcb.com.gh (GW-0023-
8235)0303-969958/0303-969959                                                                              
Weija                                                                                          P.O. Box  WJ 643, Weija Accra                             
  weijamgr@gcb.com.gh (GS-0164-7269)    0303-969962/0244362091           
TEMA ZONE
Area Manager’s Office P.O. Box CO 152, Temaareatema@gcb.com.gh0303-204824 
Tema Main P.O. Box CO 152, Tema
temamainmgr@gcb.com.gh (GT-000-
7970)Mgr:0303-202760
Tema Agency(Long Room) P.O. Box CO 152, Tema
temamainmgr@gcb.com.gh (GT-000-
7970)0303-204768
Tema Agency (Golden Jubilee) P.O. Box CO 152, Tema
temamainmgr@gcb.com.gh (GT-000-
7970)
Tema Market  P.O. Box CO173, Tema (GT--007-9740)
 temamktmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0303-202861/0303-201422Fax: 0303-204763
Evergreen Agency 0303-202094
Tema Ind. Area P.O. Box CS 8202, Tema Ind 
Area(GT-070-1829)      
temaindmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0303-302818/0303-300575Fax.-0303-306082
Tema Fishing Harbour P.O. Box CO 281, Fishing Hbr.(GT- 105 – 
4205)
temahrbmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0303-202413/0206733090 Fax: 0303 202344
Safe Bond P. O. Box CO 1737, Tema(GT-140-8152)safebondmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr.:  0303-215588/0303-215576                                          
Tema Meridian GPS GT-021-67-01temameridianmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0303-224464
Tema Community 2 temacomm2mgr@gcb.com.
gh(GT-071-00330303-214050/0302-953539List of Branches  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1150
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS(DIGITAL ADDRESS) TELEPHONE
Ashaiman P.O. Box AS 199, Ashaiman (GB-029-
1204)
ashaimanmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0303306606
Legon P.O. Box LG 17, Legon (GA-488-0208)
legonmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr-0289456996 
/02894569967/0502568703
Madina P.O. Box MD 431, Madina,Accra (GD-212-
4616)
madiamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr-0302-501240/0203255954
Aburi P.O. Box 98, Aburi (E3-003-4398)
aburimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0502939961/0244792520/0342822043-45
Fax:0342822033
Mampong-Akwapim P.O. Box 54, Mampong-Akwapim (AM-
0007-2880)
 makwapimmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0342722049/0342795872/0205467887
AkropongAkwapim P.O. Box 83, AkropongAkwapim (E2-
0003-2559)
 akropongmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0245130850
Somanya P.O. Box 78, Somanya (EY-0000-3518)
somanyamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03420-91421 Fax: 027-8787060
Akosombo P.O. Box 24, Akosombo (EA-0495-7471)
akosombomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03430-21142/03430-20472  Fax: 03430-20530
Akuse P. O. Box 40, Akuse (EL-1063-9249)akusemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03420-91311Fax: 0377900013
Tetteh Quarshie Circle P. O. Box, LG14, Legon 9(GA-289-4891)ttqmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0302- 506221/0302-506198/9Fax: 0302-506223
Ada P. O. Box AF55, Ada (GY-0772-3463)adamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0303-910411/0303-910412/3
Spintex Martey Tsuru  GZ-196-0672, spintexmtmgr@gcb.com.gh,spintexmtopsmgr@gcb.com.gh                              Mgr:0302946851/0509184380/0596915554Ops:0596915556
Nungua P.O. Box TN 30, Nungua (GZ-010-2589)
nunguamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0302-715352 /0302-
715365/0302715351
Cent.Univ.College centralunimgr@gcb.com.gh(GN-0326-6404)Mgr:0501327283/0502569063/0558035035List of Branches  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1151
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS(DIGITAL ADDRESS) TELEPHONE
Adenta Shopping Centre P. O. Box AF 2070, Adenta (GD-039-
0201)
adentashpcntmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0302-522541/0302-522543Fax:0302522542
Adjiringano P. O. Box MD 1727, Madina (GD-212-4214) adjiriganormgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0303-3969960/0303-
969961/0207434271-2
A & C Mall                                                    GA-412-0880 
ancmallmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0302664910
Mandela-Park GPS Code – GB-005-9057, AshaimanashIMnmpmmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0302-905935/0302-906001/0302-
916084
 Spintex Martey Tsuru   GZ-196-0672                Mgr:0302946851
 0509184380
Madina Zongo Junc. GM-016-5223, Madina Zongomadinazjuncmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0555351374
KOFORIDUA ZONE
Regional Manager’s Office P.O. Box KF 286, Koforidua
koforiduaarea@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03420-26790/03420-26791 
Koforidua P. O. Box  KF 286, 
Koforidua(EN-010-4324)
koforiduamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03420-
26832/23049/23059/23069/22258
New Tafo P.O. Box 42, New Tafo (EE-1135-6593)
newtafomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0244329645/0242651824
Suhum P.O. Box 155, Suhum(ES-0000-6936)suhummgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0207270828
Asamankese P.O. Box 167, Asamankese (EW-0001-
8055)
asamankesemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03420-91135/03420-91011
Akim Oda P.O. Box 364, Akim Oda (EB-0005-8535)
akimodamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0302915054/0302915079 Fax:0342922697
Kade P.O. Box 62, Kade (EK-0021-2750)kademgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0241905665/0209043328
Nsawam P.O. Box NW 280, Nsawam (EG-039-
0065)
nsawammgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0244312757List of Branches  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1152
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS(DIGITAL ADDRESS) TELEPHONE
Kibi P.O. Box 97, Kibi (EE-0005-1120)
kibimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0342292059/0342292067
Anyinam P.O. Box AY 46, Anyinam (ET-0743-4788)anyinammgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0544868111
Nkawkaw P.O. Box 272, Nkawkaw (EJ-0001-0348)nkawkawmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03431-22222Fax: 03431-22105
Mpraeso P.O. Box MZ 56, Mpraeso (EI-0000-5437)mpraesomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:020-2310400/0543325730
Donkorkrom P.O. Box 11, Donkorkrom (EP-000-9516)
donkorkrommgr@gcb.com.ghMgr :03424-22039/0246711380Fax:0342024209
Konongo P.O. Box 137, Konongo (AN-0003-3954)konongomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0322491150
Agogo P.O. Box 74, Agogo (AN-0005-7030)
agogomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03720-98731
Juaso P.O. Box 51, Juaso (AA-0000-0645)
juasomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0342290742
Koforidua Central                                             P.O. Box 268 Koforidua (EN-010-4424) koforiduacentralmgr@gcb.com.gh                             Mgr:0208187576/0541076963
HO ZONE
Regional Manager’s Office P.O. Box HP 164, Hoareaho@gcb.com.ghMgr:03620-28251
Ho Branch P.O. Box HP 164, Ho (VH-0002-9142)homgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03620-28905
Ho Market P. O. Box HP 841, Ho Market (VH-0056-
5101)
homktmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:  03620-26459/03620-26491
Ho Polytechnic P. O. Box 164, Ho (VH-0043-4220)hopolymgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03620-27472/03620-27441
Hohoe P.O. Box 178, Hohoe (VC-0000-6172)hohoemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 020-6882475/020-6881916
Dzodze P.O. Box DJ88, Dzodze (VY-0000-1830)dzodzemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03620-91227 List of Branches  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1153
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS(DIGITAL ADDRESS) TELEPHONE
Aflao P.O. Box AF12, Aflao (VZ-0225-8170)
aflaomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 050-2098331/024-8809498/024-
9695929
Abor P. O. Box AB 48, Abor(VK-2263-7594)             
abormgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 024-4313679/024-4987062/020-
6458580   
Fax:  0278787049                                 
Keta P.O. Box KW 133, Keta (VK-0010-8786)ketamgr@gcb.com.ghMrg: 024-3247936/024-4565510
Akatsi P.O. Box 39, Akatsi (VX-0008-5279)akatsimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03626-44401/03626-44754 
Sogakope P.O. Box  SK 8, Sogakope (VU-0005-
8862)
sogakopemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:  03621-92803
Kpando P.O. Box 70, Kpando (VP-0005-3441)
kpandomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr::0507626707/0243268647/050915
5042/0244564209
Peki P.O. Box 12, Peki (VK-0010-8786)
pekimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0244313094Fax:0577900044
Jasikan P.O. Box 85, Jasikan(VJ-0001-7272)jasikanmgr@gcb.com.gh                           Mgr: 05425-98548
Kadjebi P.O. Box 27, Kadjebi (VM-0000-6816)
kadjebimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0362092950/0208881626/ 
0249889001/0506649150
Nkwanta P. O Box 56, Nkwanta (VO-00000-2468)
nkwantamgr@gcb.com.gh Mgr: 0244334835/0200608464/           
0277808121  
zzzzFax:0278787051
Dambai P. O. Box DM38, Dambai (VR-00000-
4712)
 dambaimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0546926488/0209401244 
KUMASI ZONE                
Regional Manager’s Office P.O. Box SE 1212,Suame, Kumasi areakumasi@gcb.com.ghMgr:03220-31640/0322029001Fax: 03220-23512
Regional Manager’s 
Secretariat              -   do   -
areaofficekumasi@gcb.com.ghTel: 03220-81812/82812/29001Fax: 03220-23512
Properties & Facilities 
Management UnitP. O Box SE 1212,Suame,Kumasi Tel: 03220-26468  
Fax:03220-26468List of Branches  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1154
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS(DIGITAL ADDRESS) TELEPHONE
Corporate Office P. O. Box SE 1212, Kumasi Tel: 03220-81884/81888 
Fax:  03220-81885
Kumasi Main P.O. Box 852, Kumasi (AK-064-4856)
kumasimainmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03220-37303/03220-25292Fax: 03220-24569
Ahinsan P.O. Box 8818, Ahinsan, (AK-305-2032) ahinsanmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03220-31964 /33452 
Kejetia P.O. Box 1630, Kumasi (AK-019-7603)kejetiamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03220-44660/03220-30416  
Asafo Market P.O. Box 3696, Asafo( AK-039-1603)asafomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0244774696/0322491121
Jubilee House P.O. Box SE 1212, Suame 
Kumasi(AK-030-7597)
 jubileemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03220-26366/03220-30819 
KNUST P. O. UP 35 KNUST, Kumasi(AK-315-1958)
knustmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03220-62136/03220-60153/62135 Fax:  03220-62136
Ejura P.O Box 24, Ejura (AJ-0018-3770)
ejuramgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03220-97147/0206650040 
Yeji P.O. Box 29, Yeji (BP-00000-5390)yejimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0209616831/0500498311/050049
8310
Obuasi P.O. Box 290, Obuasi (AO-028-3084)
obuasimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:02024829690202479460
Bekwai Ashanti P.O. Box 127, Bekwai Ash.(AB-0003-
6475)
bekwai-ashantimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03224-20204/03224-202143 
Dunkwa-On-Offin P.O. Box 228, Dunkwa-On-Offin (CU-
0004-6276)
dunkwamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr::03322-28236/0246952910 
New Edubiase P.O. Box 42, New Edubiase (A3-0005-
5393)
edubiasemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0506060114/0506060122 
New Offinso P.O. Box 60, New Offinso (A7-0001-
6443)
offinsomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0208182789/0548082513List of Branches  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1155
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS(DIGITAL ADDRESS) TELEPHONE
Nkawie P.O Box 69, Nkawie (AH-0000-4210)
nkawiemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03223-92269/98739
Mampong Ashanti P.O. Box 94, Mampong- Ashanti (AM-
0007-3287)
mampongashantimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0500062777/03220-
66129/050279188
Fax: 03222-22327
Effiduase Ashanti P.O. Box 10, Effiduase  (AR-0000-3083)effiduasemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03220-92173
Ejisu P.O. Box 49, Ejisu (AE-0000-0241)
ejisumgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03220- 94280/03220-99449 
Agona Ashanti P.O. Box 16, Agona Ashanti (AZ-0000-
4116)
ashantiagonamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03220-91820/0594530677
Sefwi-Wiawso P.O. Box 59, Sefwi-Wiawso (WG-0011-
9940)
sefwiwiawsomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03223-95199
Tech Junction P. O. Box UP1151, KNUST, Kumasi (AK-316-
4029)
 techjunctionmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0206881894
Bantama P. O. Box PT 80, Kumasi (AK-059-5478)
bantamamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:  03220-48820/03220-48821/48822
Suame Magazine P. O. Box SE1212, Kumasi (AK-030-7249)
suamemagazinemgr@com.gh03224-94383/03224-94372
Sofoline P. O. Box SE1212, Kumasi 0322497988/0322497996
Corporate Banking Ksi P. O. Box 852, Adum, Kumasi 03220-81884/03220-81888
GCNet P.O.Box 3696, Asafoasafomgr@gcb.com.gh0322032525
Recoveries P.O.Box 852, Adum Kumasi
creditmonitpringrecoveriesdept@gcb.
com.ghMgr:0322494546/0322494544
0501642512/0556566864
TAMALE ZONE
Regional Manager’s Office P.O. Box TL 228, Tamale areatamale@gcb.com.ghTel:03720-26415/03720-25715 Fax:03720-22765
Properties & Facilities Office P. O. Box TL 228, Tamale Tel:03720-27276List of Branches  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1156
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS(DIGITAL ADDRESS) TELEPHONE
Tamale Main P.O. Box TL 228, (NT-0003-5485)
Tamale tamalemainmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03720-99346/0208149820Fax:  03720-22455
Tamale Market P.O. Box TL 766, Tamale (NT-0005-0027 )
tamalemktmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03720-22608Fax: 03720-22608
Tamale Hospital Road P. O. Box TL. 2240, Tamale (NT-0061-
6472)
thospitalroadmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03720-27279/03720-27278
Fax: 03720-27279
Bolgatanga P.O. Box 12, Bolgatanga (UB-0003-2952)
bolgamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03820-24961/0244777134/02440244229645
Bawku P.O. Box 38, Bawku (UA-0000-1529)
bawkumgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03820-
95691/0244802107/0243514991
Navrongo P.O. Box 28, Navrongo (UK-0007-7323)
navrongomgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03821-
22318/0208406682/0247262517
Tumu P.O. Box 2, Tumu (XS-00013-0995)
tumumgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 0208482076/03920-21214
Lawra P.O. Box 92, Lawra (XL-0000-9934)
lawramgr@gcb,com.ghMgr: 03920-
96412/0208412660/0244431708
Wa P.O. Box 66, Wa (XW-0006-9068)
wamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03920-20501/03920-
22039/0244802107
Bole P.O. Box 24, Bole (NB-00007-7386)
bolemgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03720-98393
Damongo P.O. Box DM 40, Damongo (N5-00004-
8712)
damongomgr@gcb.com.gh Mgr: Mgr:0266340632/0266345443
Yendi P.O. Box 32, Yendi (NY-0010-6685)
yendimgr@gcb.com.gh Mgr: 0372095241/0208180205/ 
0208169462/0506390974
 
Salaga P.O. Box SL 7, Salaga (N4-00007-7512)
salagamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03720-95192
Kete-Krachi P.O. Box 13, Kete-krachi (VS–0005–1021)
kete-krachimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03620-99680/0248507816
Bimbilla P.O. Box 27, Bimbilla (NN-0004-7771)bimbillamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0205219977/ /0208038689List of Branches  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1157
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS(DIGITAL ADDRESS) TELEPHONE
Walewale P. O Box 91, Walewale(ND-00002-4241)
walewalemgr@gcb.com.gh   Mgr:03820-94326/0243568303
SUNYANI ZONE
Regional Manager’s Office P.O. Box 34, Sunyani 
sunyaniareamgr@gcb.com.ghArea Mgr: 03520-25957/03520-24084 
Sunyani Main  P.O. Box 34, Sunyani (BS-0007-5220) sunyanimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03520-27716/27157Fax: 03520-27087
Sunyani Market P. O. Box 325, Sunyani (BS-0008-2307)
sunyanimktmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03520-24267/03520-24103/03520-
24193
 Fax:  03520-24474 
Berekum P.O. Box 115, Berekum (BB-0007-6719)berekummgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:  03522-22567/03522-22193 Fax:03522-22042
DormaaAhenkro P.O. Box: 16, Dormaa Ahenkro (BD-0003-
7891)
dormaamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:03523-22047/ 03523-90759/03520-
96115/ 03520-96124 
Fax: 027-8787012
Techiman Main P.O. Box TM 196, Techiman (BT-0000-
9353)
techimanmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0500459100
 Fax: 03525-22048
Techiman Market P. O. Box TM 796, Techiman (BT-0003-
2964)
techimanmktmgr@gcb.com.ghTel:03525-22395
Fax: 03525-22394
Wenchi P.O. Box WC 49, Wenchi (BW-0006-
4992)                          
wenchimgr@gcb.com.gh0352195282
Fax: 03521-95282
Nkoranza P.O. Box 44, Nkoranza (BO-0007-0669)nkoranzamgr@gcb.com.gh03520-92076 
Kintampo P.O. Box 31, Kintampo (BK-00000-4208)kintampomgr@gcb.com.gh03520-92047
Duayaw Nkwanta P.O. Box 66, DuayawNkwanta (B2-0002-
8068)
duayaw-nkwantamgr@gcb.com.gh0209126053 
Bechem P.O. Box 69, Bechem (B3-0000-8954)
bechemmgr@gcb.com.gh0508589408List of Branches  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1158
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS(DIGITAL ADDRESS) TELEPHONE
Akumadan P.O. Box 33 Akumadan (A6-0000-3963)
akumadanmgr@gcb.com.gh0244313714
Tepa P.O. Box 103, Tepa,(AX-0000-8210 tepamgr@gcb.com.gh0352196789 
Hwidiem P.O. Box 11, Hwidiem(BR-0000-4631)
hwidiemmgr@gcb.com.gh                           0209808042
Goaso P.O. Box 83,Goaso (BU-0005-1331 )
goasomgr@gcb.com.gh0505438683
MimP.O. Box 33, Mim(BU-1225-3379)mimmgr@gcb.com.gh0505252483
Sankore Private Post Bag, Sankore (BV-2275-2415)
sankoremgr@gcb.com.gh0244313638
Sampa P. O. Box 90, Sampa,(BJ-003-8518) sampamgr@gcb.com.gh0244341751
Drobo P. O. Box 27, Japekrom (BI-0007-8239)
drobomgr@gcb.com.gh 0500450009
TAKORADI  ZONE
Regional Manager’s Office P.O. Box 475, Takoradi 
tadiareamgr@gcb.com.gh 03120-24948/03120-23072/ 22355Fax: 03120-25255
Corporate Banking P.O. Box 475, Takoradi 
tadiareamgr@gcb.com.ghTel:03120-26700/Fax: 03120-25226
Takoradi Main P. O. Box 475, Takoradi (WS-247-7131)
tadimainmgr@gcb.com.gh 03122-95475/03122-95471/03129-97650
Takoradi Harbour P.O. Box 707, Takoradi (WS-406-1610)
tadihbrmgr@gcb.com.gh03120-22731/03122-91117/03122-
91118/0505787911 
Fax:03120-27309
Takoradi Market Circle P.O. Box MC 098, Takoradi (WS-245-2138)tadimktmgr@gcb.com.gh03122-90107/03039-62099 Fax: 03123-20374
Sekondi P.O. Box 101, Sekondi (WS-019-2158)
sekondimgr@gcb.com.gh03120-46511/0244147472/0208165421 
Tarkwa P. O. Box 90, Tarkwa (WT-0005-5782)
tarkwamgr@gcb.com.gh 03123-20374/03122-291065/0247290011Fax: 03123-20374Mgr: 0242964302List of Branches  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1159
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS(DIGITAL ADDRESS) TELEPHONE
Axim P.O. Box 55, Axim (WN-0000-5802)
aximmgr@gcb.com.gh0303-960895/03121-98735
Half-Assini P.O. Box 54, Half-Assini (WJ-0001-2730)half-assinimgr@gcb.com.gh03122-91099/03122-91097
Dadieso Private Mail Bag, Dadieso (WU-0007-
6342)
dadiesomgr@gcb.com.gh 0244335687 
Fax: 0277900136
Elubo P. O. Box 134, Elubo( WJ-2710-3555)elubomgr@gcb.com.gh 03122-90714/0208165048 Fax: 03122-22546
GCNET Elubo P. O. Box 134, Elubo( WJ-2710-3555)elubomgr@gcb.com.gh03122-22547/03122-90714
Enchi P.O. Box 15, Enchi (WA-00000-5079)
enchimgr@gcb.com.gh03121-93988  
Samreboi P.O. Box S 40, Samreboi(WY-3374-0525)samreboimgr@gcb.com.gh0277811205 /0502459088/03122-92709Fax: 0278787066
Prestea P.O. Box 102, Prestea (WP-2580-0759)
 presteamgr@gcb.com.gh 03120-92670/0244589287 Fax: 0277900138
Bogoso P.O. Box 42, Bogoso (WP-004-4349)bogosomgr@gcb.com.gh03120-92655/0277801256 
CAPE COAST ZONE
Regional Manager’s Office P.O. Box 65, Cape Coast 
areacapecoast@gcb.com.gh 03321-30440/03321-37887 Fax:  03321-32625
Cape Coast Main P.O. Box 65, Cape Coast (CC-008-5753)
capecoastmainmgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:2134253, (0)33 2132354 Fax:03321-32549
University of Cape Coast P.O. Box 046, Cape Coast (CC-121-1279)capecoastunimgr@gcb.com.ghMgr:0312293427/0332096388 Fax: 03321-36377(0)240 459 472/0247966760
Cape Coast Coronation 
Junction     P. O. Box  363, Adisadel Cape Coast 
(CC-001-9477)Capecoastcjuncmgr@gcb.com.gh                               Mgr:0596915896Ops:0596915895
Agona Swedru P.O. Box 186, Agona Swedru (CO-0000-9729)
agonaswedrumgr@gcb.com.gh(0)332 020 291, 2093918
Mgr:03320-21071 /0203054198
Fax:03320-20414
Assin Fosu P.O. Box  76, Assin Fosu(CR-0008-0889)
assinfosumgr@gcb.com.gh0507465096List of Branches  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1160
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS(DIGITAL ADDRESS) TELEPHONE
Mankessim P.O. Box 78, Mankessim (CM-0412-4692)
mankessimmgr@gcb.com.gh0555231015/0505709111Mgr:(0)332 191 435
Fax:0277 900113
Winneba P.O. Box 128, Winneba (CE-008-3160)
winnebamgr@gcb.com.gh03323 22133/03323-21064Fax:03323-22133
Twifu Praso P.O. Box TW 84, Twifu Praso (CT-0000-
3606)
twifuprasomgr@gcb.com.gh0244314810 
Fax: 027 7900 124
Breman Asikuma P.O. Box 60, Breman-
Asikuma(CB-0013-7330)
bremanmgr@gcb.com.gh0246-339233
Fax:0277900128
Saltpond P.O. Box SP 096, Saltpond (CM-0002-
6190 )
saltpondmgr@gcb.com.gh03321-92003Mgr:0241946490 
Abura Dunkwa P.O. Box 29, Abura Dunkwa (CA-0000-
1639)
aburadunkwamgr@gcb.com.gh  03321-91964
Elmina P. O. Box EL 113 Elmina (CK-0010-1794 )
elminamgr@gcb.com.ghMgr: 03320-94899
REGIONAL OFFICES
Accra P.O. Box K.96 Accra New Town areaaccra@gcb.com.ghArea Mgr: 0302-249772/0302-225928, 
222641 
Fax: 0302-236671
Cape Coast P.O. Box 65, Cape Coast (CC-008-5753 )
areacapecoast@gcb.com.gh03321-32625,37887 Fax: 03321-32625
Ho P.O. Box 164, Ho (VH-0002-9142)
areaho@gcb.com.gh03620-28251,26543 Fax:03620-27598
Koforidua P.O. Box KF286, Koforidua
koforiduaarea@gcb.com.
gh(EN-010-4324)03420-26790/26791
Fax:03420-23042List of Branches  (cont’d)Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1161
GCB Bank Limited Annual Report 2020
Boar d of Direc tors
Mr. Anselm Ransford A. Sowah
Managing DirectorMr. Jude Koﬁ   Arthur 
ChairmanMr. Socrates Afram
DMD Finance
4 5 6
7 8 9
10 11 12
Mr. Nik Amarteiﬁ  o
Non-Executive DirectorMrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Edward Prince Amoatia Younge
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Francis Arthur-Collins
Non-Executive DirectorQueen Mother Of Denkyira 
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Samuel Amankwah
DMD Operations
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba
Non- Executive Director
Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu
Non-Executive DirectorMr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah
Non-Executive Director3 2 1NAMES OF BRANCHES ADDRESS(DIGITAL ADDRESS) TELEPHONE
Kumasi P.O. Box SE 1212 Suame, Kumasi (AK-064-
4856)
areakumasi@gcb.com.gh03220-31604,29001Fax:03220-23512
Sunyani P.O. Box 34, Sunyani (BS-0007-5220)
areasunyanimgr@gcb.com.gh03520-25957/8, 24084 Fax: 03520-27162
Takoradi P. O. Box 475, Takoradi (WS-247-7131)
tadiareamgr@gcb.com.gh03120-23072/22355/24948Fax: 03120-25226
Tamale P.O. Box 228, Tamale (NT-0003-5485)areatamale@gcb.com.gh03720-26415, 25715,22999 Fax: 03720-22765
Tema P. O. Box CO152, Tema (GT-000-7970)
areatema@gcb .com.gh0303-204824Fax: 0303-204824List of Branches  (cont’d)Social Media Handles
& Other Info
GCB Bank’s O/uniFB03cial
WhatsApp  Line
0202 422 422
SWIFT: GHCBGHAC
Telefax: 0302 663 964
Email: corporatea/uniFB00airs@gcb.com.gh
Web: www.gcbbank.com.gh
Follow GCBBankLimited
Tel: 0302 664 910-18
0302 672 852-4
0302 672 859-65


Extracted from: GCB2022 Annual Report (updated).pdf
GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
2Proﬁle of Gcb Bank PLCGCB Bank PLC is Ghana’s ﬁrst and largest indigenous bank with the vision to be the leading Bank in all 
our markets and the mission to provide ﬁrst class banking solutions for customers and value for all stakeholders.
Established in 1953 and listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange since 1996, GCB Bank acquired selected assets 
and liabilities of two indigenous banks in 2017 and expanded its branch network and ATMs to over 185 and 340 respectively in its quest to continue being the most dominant player in Ghana’s banking industry. 
In 2020, the Bank developed a four-year strategy to position itself as the most dominant market player and 
the best by every industry standard, anchoring its plan around three main strategic pillars namely revenue growth and proﬁtability, operational excellence, people and talents.
      Ratings  
GCB Bank is rated Ghana’s safest Bank by Moody’s, Fitch, Standard & Poor’s and the most compliant Bank in Africa by the Association for Certiﬁed Compliance Professionals in Africa (ACCPA).
      Service Proposition
GCB prides itself as Ghana’s most welcoming bank, o/uniFB00ering timely and accessible ﬁnancial support through quality service and expert solutions that encourage businesses and enrich people’s lives. The bank’s services are structured to serve every facet of the customer’s lifecycle and all types of businesses operating in diverse sectors of the economy irrespective of size. The Bank, given its unrivalled understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs of Ghanaian residents abroad.
      Financial Innovation and leadership
In 2020, GCB Bank became the ﬁrst Bank to launch a digital mobile money wallet when it launched the G-Money product. The digital wallet which is telco-agnostic and fully interoperable allows customers to send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank account by registered users and also performs unique functions including borrowing funds, and individual and group savings.  through quality service and expert solutions that encourage businesses and enrich people’s lives. through quality service and expert solutions that encourage businesses and enrich people’s lives. 
The bank’s services are structured to serve every facet of the customer’s lifecycle and all types of 
businesses operating in diverse sectors of the economy irrespective of size. The Bank, given its unrivalled 
understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs through quality service and expert solutions that encourage businesses and enrich people’s lives. 
The bank’s services are structured to serve every facet of the customer’s lifecycle and all types of 
businesses operating in diverse sectors of the economy irrespective of size. The Bank, given its unrivalled 
understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs 
      Financial Innovation and leadership
In 2020, GCB Bank became the ﬁrst Bank to launch a digital mobile money wallet when it launched the The bank’s services are structured to serve every facet of the customer’s lifecycle and all types of The bank’s services are structured to serve every facet of the customer’s lifecycle and all types of The bank’s services are structured to serve every facet of the customer’s lifecycle and all types of 
businesses operating in diverse sectors of the economy irrespective of size. The Bank, given its unrivalled The bank’s services are structured to serve every facet of the customer’s lifecycle and all types of 
businesses operating in diverse sectors of the economy irrespective of size. The Bank, given its unrivalled businesses operating in diverse sectors of the economy irrespective of size. The Bank, given its unrivalled 
understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs 
In 2020, GCB Bank became the ﬁrst Bank to launch a digital mobile money wallet when it launched the 
G-Money product. The digital wallet which is telco-agnostic and fully interoperable allows customers to 
send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank account by registered users and also businesses operating in diverse sectors of the economy irrespective of size. The Bank, given its unrivalled businesses operating in diverse sectors of the economy irrespective of size. The Bank, given its unrivalled 
understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs 
of Ghanaian residents abroad.understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs 
of Ghanaian residents abroad.
      Financial Innovation and leadership
In 2020, GCB Bank became the ﬁrst Bank to launch a digital mobile money wallet when it launched the 
G-Money product. The digital wallet which is telco-agnostic and fully interoperable allows customers to 
send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank account by registered users and also of Ghanaian residents abroad.
      Financial Innovation and leadership
In 2020, GCB Bank became the ﬁrst Bank to launch a digital mobile money wallet when it launched the of Ghanaian residents abroad.of Ghanaian residents abroad.of Ghanaian residents abroad.of Ghanaian residents abroad.of Ghanaian residents abroad.
      Financial Innovation and leadership      Financial Innovation and leadership      Financial Innovation and leadership
In 2020, GCB Bank became the ﬁrst Bank to launch a digital mobile money wallet when it launched the In 2020, GCB Bank became the ﬁrst Bank to launch a digital mobile money wallet when it launched the 
G-Money product. The digital wallet which is telco-agnostic and fully interoperable allows customers to 
send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank account by registered users and also In 2020, GCB Bank became the ﬁrst Bank to launch a digital mobile money wallet when it launched the 
send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank account by registered users and also 
performs unique functions including borrowing funds, and individual and group savings.  send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank account by registered users and also send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank account by registered users and also 
performs unique functions including borrowing funds, and individual and group savings.  send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank account by registered users and also GCB prides itself as Ghana’s most welcoming bank, o/uniFB00ering timely and accessible ﬁnancial support 
through quality service and expert solutions that encourage businesses and enrich people’s lives. 
The bank’s services are structured to serve every facet of the customer’s lifecycle and all types of 
businesses operating in diverse sectors of the economy irrespective of size. The Bank, given its unrivalled 
understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs 
      Financial Innovation and leadership
In 2020, GCB Bank became the ﬁrst Bank to launch a digital mobile money wallet when it launched the through quality service and expert solutions that encourage businesses and enrich people’s lives. through quality service and expert solutions that encourage businesses and enrich people’s lives. through quality service and expert solutions that encourage businesses and enrich people’s lives. 
The bank’s services are structured to serve every facet of the customer’s lifecycle and all types of through quality service and expert solutions that encourage businesses and enrich people’s lives. through quality service and expert solutions that encourage businesses and enrich people’s lives. 
The bank’s services are structured to serve every facet of the customer’s lifecycle and all types of The bank’s services are structured to serve every facet of the customer’s lifecycle and all types of The bank’s services are structured to serve every facet of the customer’s lifecycle and all types of 
businesses operating in diverse sectors of the economy irrespective of size. The Bank, given its unrivalled 
understanding of the Ghanaian economic context, has also developed unique solutions to serve the needs 
In 2020, GCB Bank became the ﬁrst Bank to launch a digital mobile money wallet when it launched the 
G-Money product. The digital wallet which is telco-agnostic and fully interoperable allows customers to 
send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank account by registered users and also       Financial Innovation and leadership
G-Money product. The digital wallet which is telco-agnostic and fully interoperable allows customers to 
send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank account by registered users and also G-Money product. The digital wallet which is telco-agnostic and fully interoperable allows customers to 
send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank account by registered users and also send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank account by registered users and also send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank account by registered users and also 
performs unique functions including borrowing funds, and individual and group savings.  performs unique functions including borrowing funds, and individual and group savings.  performs unique functions including borrowing funds, and individual and group savings.  performs unique functions including borrowing funds, and individual and group savings.  send and receive funds from any mobile money wallet or bank account by registered users and also 
performs unique functions including borrowing funds, and individual and group savings.  
GCB Bank PLC
www.gcbbank.com.gh
To be the leading Bank in all our marketsVISION
To be the leading Bank in all our markets
MISSION
To provide ﬁrst class banking solutions for our customers and value for all stakeholders.
To provide ﬁrst class banking solutions for our 
To provide ﬁrst class banking solutions for our 
customers and value for all stakeholders.
PROFILE OF GCB BANK PLC
HISTORY AND KEY MILESTONESGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
304
06
07
15
21
24
25
30
38
47
65
72
74
76
80
82
174
175
177
179
185Notice of Annual General Meeting
Corporate Information
Board of Directors
Executive Committee (EXCO)
Five Year Financial Summary
Financial Highlights
Chairman’s Statement
Managing Director’s Review
Report of the Directors
Corporate Governance Statement
Independent Auditor’s Report
Statements of Proﬁt or Loss and Other 
Comprehensive Income
Statements of Financial Position
Statements of Changes in Equity
Statements of Cash Flows
Notes to the Financial Statements
Value Added Statement
Shareholders’ Information
Agents/Correspondent Banks
List of Branches
Invitation and Form of ProxyReport ContentGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
4
DATED THIS 23RD DAY OF MAY, 2023
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
(SGD.)
Amma Agyeman Kusi-Appouh
Company Secretar yNotice of Annual General 
Meeting
Special Business 
as ordinary resolutions
5. Capital Raise
• To authorize the Directors to raise additional equity 
capital of up to GHS 1 billion through a renounceable rights issue on such terms (including the share price, the number of o/uniFB00er shares, allotment, and other modalities) as the directors deem ﬁt and procure the additional listing of the issued ordinary shares on the Ghana Stock Exchange.
• To authorize the Directors to raise any shortfall (in the required GHS 1 billion under the rights issue) through either a single or multiple private placement of ordinary shares to investors on such terms (including the share price and other modalities) as the directors deem ﬁt and to procure the listing (by introduction) of the issued ordinary shares on the Ghana Stock Exchange, provided that the private placement(s) shall be implemented and completed within 12 months of the close of the rights issue.
• To authorize the Directors to raise any shortfall (in the required GHS 1 billion under the rights issue and the private placement of ordinary shares) through either a single or multiple private placement of non-redeemable, non-cumulative and convertible preference shares to investors on such terms (including the coupon rate and other modalities) as the directors deem ﬁt and to procure the listing (by introduction) of the issued preference shares on the Ghana Stock Exchange, provided that the private placement(s) shall be implemented and completed within 12 months of the close of the rights issue and the aggregate amount to be raised shall not exceed GHS 250 million.  
as special resolutions
6. Amendment to the Bank’s Constitution
• To amend paragraph 12 of the Company’s constitution by deleting and replacing it with the following:
 “The Company may issue preference shares to existing members or any other persons not exceeding an aggregate of 500,000,000 shares as authorised under paragraph 9 of this Constitution.”
• To amend paragraph 13 of the Company’s constitution by deleting and replacing it with the following:
“The commercial terms of any preference shares issued by the Company shall be as agreed between the Company and the relevant person (and in accordance with applicable law, including any prevailing capital requirement directives of the Bank of Ghana) and set out in a relevant agreement.”NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that GCB Bank PLC will hold a virtual 29th Annual 
General Meeting and stream online from Movenpick Ambassador Hotel, Accra via https://gcbbankagm .com, the Bank’s social media handles (Facebook and 
YouTube) and GTV on Friday, 30
th June 2023 a t 10:00 a.m.  to transact the 
following business:
Agenda
Ordinary Business 
as ordinary resolutions
1. To consider and adopt the Financial Statements of the Company for the 
year ended December 31, 2022 together with the Reports of the Directors and Auditors thereon.
2. To re-elect Directors of the Company retiring by rotation under the Companies Act 2019 (Act 992). 
• Mr. Osmani Ayuba 
• Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu
• Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asiriﬁ
• Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah 
3. To re-elect Directors of the Company in line with the Bank of Ghana Corporate 
Governance Directive 2018.
• Mrs. Lydia Essah
• Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III
4. To authorize the Directors to ﬁx the remuneration of Auditors.GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
5Notice of Annual General Meeting (Continued)
Notes
In accordance with Regulatory Guidelines and the Bank’s Constitution, attendance and participation by members or 
their proxies in this year’s Annual General Meeting of the Bank, shall be virtual (by online participation).
A. Proxy
1. A member is entitled to virtually attend and vote or may appoint a proxy to attend and vote on his or her behalf 
either online or by post. Such a proxy need not be a member of the Bank.  For a Proxy Form to be valid for purposes of the meeting, it must be completed and submitted via shareregistry@ gcb.com.gh  or deposited at 
the Share Registry, GCB Bank PLC, Head O/uniFB03ce, High Street, Accra, not less than 48 hours before the meeting. 
2. A copy of the Proxy Form can be downloaded from: https://gcbbankagm .com  and may be ﬁlled and sent via 
email to: shareregistry@ gcb.com.gh.
3. The appointment of a proxy will not prevent a member from subsequently attending and voting at the meeting 
(via online). Where a member attends the meeting, the proxy appointment shall be deemed to be revoked.
B. Accessing, Participating and Voting at the Virtual AGM
1. To access and vote at the Virtual AGM, a conﬁdential unique token will be sent to shareholders by email and/or 
SMS e/uniFB00ective 9
th June, 2023 to grant access to the AGM.
2. Shareholders who do not receive this token can contact the GCB Bank PLC Share Registry on: 
shareregistry@ gcb.com.gh  or call 0302-668712, 0244-338508, 0244-318079, 0244-358514 to be sent the 
unique token any time before the date of the AGM.
3. To gain access to the Virtual AGM, shareholders must visit the designated website https:// www. gcbbankagm .com  
and input their token on the portal to join and vote during the meeting. 
4. Further assistance on accessing the meeting and voting electronically can be found on https://
www. gcbbankagm .com
5. The  AGM  Proceedings would be  streamed Live on GTV, Facebook and YouTube for shareholders’ observation and e/uniFB00ective participation. 
C. Other Information
1. The Bank’s Annual Report and other information on the AGM would be available on the Bank’s websites, https://
gcbbank .com.gh   and https://gcbbankagm .com.gh 
2. For further information contact: 
 The Registrar
 Share Registry
 GCB Bank PLC
 High Street Accra Tel: 0302668712, 0244-338508, 0244-318079, 0244-358514 Email: shareregistry@ gcb.com.gh GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
6Corporate Information
Directors: Mr. Jude Koﬁ Arthur - (Board Chairman)
Mr. John Koﬁ Adomakoh - (Managing Director)
Mr. Socrates Afram - (DMD- Finance)
Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey - (DMD-Operations)
Mr. Samuel Kwame Yedu Aidoo - (Executive Director, Wholesale 
& Investment Banking)
Mrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah - (Non-Executive Director)
Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III - (Non-Executive Director)
Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah - (Non-Executive Director)Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba - (Non-Executive Director)Mr. Francis Arthur Collins - (Non-Executive Director)
Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu - (Non-Executive Director)
Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asiriﬁ - (Non-Executive Director)Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah - (Non-Executive Director)
Secretary: Ms. Amma Agyeman Kusi-AppouhGCB Bank BuildingThorpe Road, High StreetP. O. Box 134, Accra
Auditor: Deloitte & ToucheChartered AccountantsThe Deloitte Place, Plot No. 71O/uniFB00 George Walker Bush HighwayNorth DzorwuluP. O. Box GP 453, Accra
Registrar:  Share RegistryGCB Bank PLCHead O/uniFB03ce, High Street , Accra
Registered o/uniFB03ce: GCB Bank BuildingThorpe Road, High StreetP. O. Box 134, AccraDigital Address - GA-183-1907GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
7
Board of Directors
1
5
9
132
6
103
7
114
8
12
1. Mr. Jude Koﬁ Arthur 
2. Mr. John Koﬁ Adomakoh 3. Mr. Socrates Afram 4. Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey 5. Mr. Samuel Kwame Yedu Aidoo   6. Mrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah7. Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III 8. Mr. Francis Arthur Collins9. Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah 10. Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba 11. Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu12. Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asiriﬁ 13. Hon. Dr. Stephen AmoahGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
8Directors’ 
Proﬁles
Jude is an Independent Non- Executive Director of the Bank appointed in 2017. He is the 
Chairman of the Board and a Banker with over 40 years’ experience in Banking. 
Jude graduated from the University of Ghana Business School with a Second Class Upper 
degree in 1976. He is an honorary fellow of the Chartered Institute of Bankers Ghana. He commenced his Banking career in Merchant Bank Ghana Limited, now UMB, in 1978 where he rose to head the Corporate Finance Division of the Bank and became a Director of Merban Investment Holdings Limited, a subsidiary of the Bank. 
In 1994, together with a group of investors, he set up First Atlantic Merchant Bank Limited 
(FAMBL) now First Atlantic Bank and was appointed the ﬁrst Managing Director of the Bank in 1994. He served as Managing Director until 2012 when he retired honourably.
He has had extensive executive education and is associated with such renowned and 
prestigious institutions as Harvard Business School, INSEAD- France, Wharton Business School- University of Pennsylvania, Templeton College- Oxford University, Stanford University, National University of Singapore (NUS), Ashridge Institute of Management, Euromoney Training School and the International Centre for Monetary and Banking Studies in Geneva.
Koﬁ is an experienced banking professional with close to thirty (30) years of experience leading strategic teams in international, regional, and domestic ﬁnancial institutions. He has been working in executive management-level roles for the past sixteen (16) years. 
Prior to joining GCB Bank in November 2020, Koﬁ worked with African Export-Import Bank 
(AFREXIMBANK), Cairo, as a Director and Global Head for Project and Asset-Based Finance for eleven (11) years. He also held executive leadership roles at Barclays Bank Ghana Limited (now ABSA Bank) as the Executive Director in charge of Corporate Banking, Ecobank Ghana Limited as the Head of Institutional Banking, and the erstwhile Trust Bank Limited. 
Koﬁ has experience in International, Corporate/Institutional, Transaction Banking, Development 
Finance, Project, and Export Finance, with a track record in transforming businesses and sustainably growing revenue and balance sheet. 
He led and structured several transactions worth over USD10 billion across the African 
continent (both public and private sectors) in di/uniFB00erent industries, including manufacturing, health care, telecommunication, energy (oil and gas), transport (ports, airports, rails, and roads), mining, agriculture, and manufacturing.
Koﬁ is an inspiring and energetic leader who is widely known for his collaborative leadership 
style and for building high-performance teams in delivering signiﬁcant bottom-line growth in uniquely challenging situations.
Koﬁ holds an Executive Masters Degree in Business Administration and a Bachelor of Science 
Degree in Agriculture, majoring in Economics, both from the University of Ghana. Mr. Jude Ko ﬁ  Arthur  
Board Chairman
Mr. Koﬁ Adomakoh
Managing DirectorGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
9
Emmanuel is a seasoned Banker who brings on board over 20 years’ multinational experience, 
working for listed companies in corporate and retail Banking, asset management, securities, brokerage services, pensions, insurance and micro-ﬁnance with operations in over 30 African countries. 
He started his career with KPMG and has since held other positions including Chief Financial 
O/uniFB03cer – WAMZ at Ecobank Ghana; Group Head, Finance at Ecobank Transnational Incorporated (Togo), Group Chief Operating O/uniFB03cer, Letshego Holdings Limited (Botswana) and Executive Business Manager to the Group CEO - Alexander Forbes Group Holdings (South Africa). Emmanuel also held several roles with Standard Bank of South Africa Group in South Africa and Ghana.
Mr. Lamptey holds a Bachelor of Commerce degree from University of Cape Coast, Ghana and 
is a fellow of Association of Chartered Certiﬁed Accountants, United Kingdom. He is an alumnus of Harvard Business School, USA.Mr. Socrates Afram 
Deputy Managing Director, Finance
Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey Deputy Managing Director, OperationsDirectors’ Proﬁle (Continued)
Socrates is a ﬁnance professional with over 15 years’ experience in the Financial Services 
sector. He has a breadth of experience across strategy; business performance and reporting (ﬁnancial, regulatory and statutory); debt and capital raising; business combination; investment and risk management.  
Prior to joining GCB Bank in February 2016, he was the Finance Director of Fidelity Bank 
Ghana Limited.  Other positions he held at Fidelity include Head of Research and Head of Business Performance & Financial Control. He worked with UBA (Ghana) as Senior Analyst deputizing for the Financial Controller. He also worked with Export Finance Company Limited as Head of Finance & Administration and General Leasing & Finance Company Limited as Analyst for lease credit applications.
Socrates is a fellow of the Association of Chartered Certiﬁed Accountants (ACCA), having 
qualiﬁed by June 2003.  He holds a Master of Business Administration (Finance) degree from the University of Ghana Business School and a Bachelor of Commerce degree from the University of Cape Coast.  He is an alumnus of the Wharton Executive Education, University of Pennsylvania, USA.GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
10Directors’ Proﬁles 
(Continued)
Sam has a strong focus and understanding of Sub-Saharan African markets. He has worked in 
Africa and the UK with structuring, origination, trading and execution experience in several African markets including but not limited to Nigeria, Ghana, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Egypt, Ethiopia, and Botswana.
He started his banking career with Standard Chartered Bank and later worked with Barclays 
Bank across Africa and in England for 10 years. In his time with Barclays, Sam worked in senior roles in the ﬁnancial markets business in Ghana and subsequently for three years out of London, he managed and coordinated Barclays Capital’s structured product o/uniFB00ering (structured assets, Index Products, ALM, Access Trades etc) into and out of Sub-Saharan African markets.
He rejoined Barclays Africa in 2013 where Sam was initially the Director, Regional Head, Global 
Markets distribution looking after the North Africa and East African regions out of Nairobi-Kenya and subsequently looking after the West African business out of Lagos-Nigeria.
Prior to joining GCB Bank, Sam worked at Fidelity Bank Ghana Ltd as the Deputy Managing 
Director (Wholesale Banking) with responsibility for the bank’s Corporate Banking, Financial Markets and Treasury, Capital Markets businesses as well as Fidelity Bank’s subsidiaries – Fidelity Asia Bank and Fidelity Securities Limited. He joined Fidelity Bank in October 2016 as Director of Treasury and Markets and was appointed Group Head, Wholesale Banking in December 2018. He also served on the Board of Fidelity Securities Limited. In his time at Fidelity bank, Sam was instrumental in the implementation of certain landmark transactions which include the ESLA Bond programme and the Securitization of GOG Contractor arrears, just to mention a few.
At GCB Bank, Sam oversees the Bank’s Wholesale and Investment Banking business, which 
comprises the Corporate Banking, Commercial Banking and Global Markets businesses as well as GCB Capital Limited, the Bank’s investment banking subsidiary.
Sam is a thought leader on African ﬁnancial and Capital markets development and is devoted 
to the continuous growth of businesses and people, with a passion to leaving things better 
than he found them.Mr. Samuel Kwame Yedu AidooExec. Dir. Wholesale & Investment Banking
Mrs. Essah is an Independent Non-Executive Director of the Bank and the Chairperson of the 
Risk and Compliance Committee of the Bank. She brought to the Board a wealth of banking experience which spans over 30 years. 
As a seasoned Bank Executive, she has a demonstrated record of exceeding proﬁt targets, 
turning around underperforming units and driving increased revenue and market share.
Mrs. Essah possesses relevant experience including risk management, compliance and 
corporate governance concepts, strategy formulation and implementation that contributes to appropriate oversight of banking activities for the beneﬁt of its shareholders, customers, employees and other stakeholders. 
Additionally, she has demonstrated over a long period of time personal integrity, structured 
and strategic thinking and analytical capability to guide major decisions. She has leveraged her leadership and communication skills to lead signiﬁcant negotiations and dialogue with senior executives and colleague board members.
Mrs. Essah holds a master’s degree from GIMPA (Ghana Institute of Management and Public 
Administration, MPHIL) and a bachelor’s degree from the University of Ghana. She also has numerous professional development certiﬁcates and programs from both international and national levels.Mrs. Lydia Essah 
A Non-Executive DirectorGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
11
Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III is the Omanhemaa of the Denkyira Traditional Area in the Central 
Region of Ghana. She is a Non-Executive Director of the Bank and the Chairperson of the Board HR and Remuneration Committee.
Currently, Nana is the Chief Executive O/uniFB03cer (CEO) of Nasaa Group of Companies and serves 
on the Board of Government Special initiatives. She holds Bachelor of Commerce degree from the University of Cape Coast and Diploma in Business Studies, Takoradi Polytechnic. 
On the chieftaincy and cultural fronts, Nana has served on several Boards and Committees to 
promote traditional governance.
Nana is a Trustee of the Ghana Heritage and Conservative Trust (GHCT) at the Kakum National 
Park. She is also the President of the Paramount Queen Mothers Forum in the Central Region.
Francis is an Independent Non-Executive Director, and the Chairman of the Board 
IT/Digitalization & Procurement Committee of the Bank. He is an Information Technology 
Consultant whose experience in the management and implementation of Information Technology systems spans thirty-eight (38) years. He has in-depth knowledge in the deployment of IT concepts and tools for re-engineering business processes, to enhance customer service delivery, improve productivity and achieve overall business success. He drew a lot of experience from engaging in IT consultancy services by executing various IT projects both home and abroad.
Mr. Arthur-Collins is a Fellow - Ghana Institute of Information Technology; Member - BCS 
Chartered Institute for Information Technology, United Kingdom; Member - Institute for the Management of Information Systems, United Kingdom; Member - British Computer Society, United Kingdom; and Member - Institute of Data Processing Management, United Kingdom. He holds Master’s Degree in Information Technology and Business Administration from the University of Leicester, United Kingdom; DP in Data Processing from the University of Science and Technology, Kumasi-Ghana; and Proﬁciency Certiﬁcate in Systems Analysis and Design from The National Computing Centre, Manchester - Awarded by the British Computer Society Information Systems Examination Board (ISEB) of the United Kingdom. 
His skill-set includes professional training in Information Technology Management; Information 
Technology Strategic Planning & Project Management and Advanced Business Management Operations, all from the National University of Singapore - Institute of Systems Science, and Strategic Management from Galilee International Management Institute, Israel.
Mr. Arthur-Collins worked with the Ghana Ports and Harbours Authority from 1985 to 2012, 
where he established the Information Technology department, and rose to the position of “Head-of-IT” with oversight responsibility for all IT systems and resources at both Tema and Takoradi Ports, a position he held until he retired from the Ghana Ports and Harbours Authority in 2012. Nana Ama Ayensua 
Saara III  A Non-Executive Director
Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins Independent Non-Executive DirectorDirectors’ Proﬁle (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
12
Ray is an Independent Non-Executive Director and the Chairman of the Audit Committee of 
the Bank. He is an experienced Chartered Accountant and Chartered Global Management Accountant with solid technical knowledge and excellent communication skills, strong analytical skills and an e/uniFB00ective team player. 
He is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Ghana and a Fellow of the 
Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (UK), Fellow of the British Society of Commerce. He holds a post graduate diploma in Strategic Financial Management from Kingston University in the UK. 
Ray was the Board Chairman of the National Insurance Commission from 2017 to March 2021. 
He is currently the Deputy Chief Executive (Finance and Administration) of Ghana Cocoa Board.
Osmani is a Non-Executive Director of the Bank. He is a Professional Accountant, a Chartered Banker and Procurement Expert. He worked in various reputable organizations including Ernst & Young Ghana, the United Nations Population Fund, Parliamentary Centre- Africa, Stanbic Bank and the Northern Development Authority. His experience covers accounting, ﬁnance, procurement and auditing.  He is currently the Managing Director of Northern Electricity Distribution Company Limited (NEDCo).
He is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants-Ghana, a member of the Chartered 
Institute of Procurement & Supply and a Chartered Banker. He also holds a Master of Arts in Economic Policy Management and Bachelor of Commerce Degree from the University of Ghana and University of Cape-Coast respectively.Mr. Emmanuel Ray 
Ankrah  
An Independent Non-Executive Director
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba  
A Non-Executive DirectorDirectors’ Proﬁles 
(Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
13
Alhaji Yakubu is a Non- Executive Director and the Chairman for the Board Credit Committee 
of the Bank. He is an experienced Banker who commenced his career with Merchant Bank Ghana Limited in September 1991 and later joined Bank of Ghana where he worked as a supervisor of Banks. 
Alhaji Yakubu holds BSc Admin. (Banking and Finance) from the University of Ghana, Legon 
(1990) and studied for MBA (Finance) at the same University (2002).
He holds a Certiﬁcate from the Financial Institution Analysis School of the Federal Reserve 
Bank, Washington DC;
Alhaji Yakubu has attended many executive development courses and seminars.He has deep knowledge and experience in Financial Institution Analysis, Corporate Governance, 
Credit Management, Treasury and Investment Management, Internal Controls and Computer Audit.
Simply known as Kwaku Asiriﬁ, a product of University of Ghana’s School of Administration, now known as University of Ghana Business School, graduated with a Bachelor of Science in Administration (Public Administration option) followed it up with a Master of Public Administration (MPA).
Kwaku got enrolled at the Ghana School of Law, was called to the Bar and has been a private 
practitioner for over two decades. After his call to the Bar, he joined the Law ﬁrm of Messrs. Akufo-Addo, Prempeh and Co., where he has since 2003 been its O/uniFB03ce Manager.  He was appointed a Notary Public in 2019.
Mr. Asiriﬁ, at the inception of the Ghana Stock Exchange pursued courses which gained him 
proﬁciency in its operations and was later engaged as a part time instructor.
As a Legal practitioner, Kwaku has represented many individuals, Companies, Institutions both 
Local and Foreign and has been involved in the resolutions of many complex legal issues.  He brings to the Board a deep and clear understanding of the legal environment in which the Bank operates and the intricate corporate governance regime of the ﬁnancial services industry.
He has been a member of the Legal Service Board since October 2017.Alhaji Alhassan 
Yakubu  
A Non-Executive Director
Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asiriﬁ  A Non-Executive DirectorDirectors’ Proﬁle (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
14Directors’ Proﬁles 
(Continued)
Dr. Stephen Amoah is a Financial Economist, a Member of Parliament for Nhyiaeso Constituency 
in the Ashanti region of Ghana and the Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry. He is a Member of the African Parliamentary Union (APU).
He is a Member of the Finance and Lands & Natural Resources Committees of Parliament. 
Besides, Dr. Amoah is a member of one of the Parliamentary Service Board Sub-Committees in charge of the unit responsible for Procurement. He is also member of the committee tasked to manage the selection of Auditing Entity that will have the mandate to audit the Auditor General. He currently serves as a Board Member of Ghana Cocoa Board. He was formerly the Chief Executive O/uniFB03cer of the Microﬁnance and Small Loans Centre, MASLOC at the O/uniFB03ce of President of Ghana where small and medium size businesses were capitalized. Dr. Amoah is the Chief Executive O/uniFB03cer of Zintex Portfolio Services Limited, a parent company with many subsidiaries: Zintex Finance & Investment Consult, Zintex Farms, Zintex Construction and owns Zintex Pharmaceutical Services Ltd. Dr. Amoah was formerly the Deputy National Health Insurance Authority (NHIA) Coordinator and later became the Chief Financial O/uniFB03cer (CFO) of Kencity Group of Companies. He is a Finance & Investment Consultant. 
He holds a Doctor of Philosophy in Actuarial Science from Kwame Nkrumah University of 
Science and Technology, (KNUST) with the option of Finance and Investment. His PhD research title is “Optimal Pricing for Risky Assets in a Competitive Market with special emphasis on Finance and Macroeconomics”. He holds a Master of Science Degree in Strategic Financial Management from the University of Derby in the United Kingdom. He has a Certiﬁcate in Entrepreneurship from MIT in the US.  He also has BSc. in Computer Science from KNUST. 
Dr. Amoah has participated in a number of International Programs, seminars and conferences 
in countries such as Germany, Netherlands, Italy and Portugal. In Italy, he spoke on the Investment Opportunity within the Sub-Region of Africa and the Challenges Confronting the Continent. Other programs in Africa Dr. Amoah has attended were in Botswana, Niger and Djibouti.      
His expertise lies in the areas of Corporate Finance and Investment: Strategic Financial 
Management, Mergers & Acquisitions, Budget Setting and Controls, Investment Appraisals & Business Planning, Risk Management, Strategic Management, Designing M&E Tools, Organizational Behavior, Macroeconomics, Modelling and Research & Development.Hon. Dr. Stephen 
AmoahA Non-Executive DirectorGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
15Executive Committee 
(EXCO)
Koﬁ is an experienced banking professional with close to thirty (30) years of experience 
leading strategic teams in international, regional, and domestic ﬁnancial institutions. He has been working in executive management-level roles for the past sixteen (16) years.
Prior to joining GCB Bank in November 2020, Koﬁ worked with African Export-Import Bank 
(AFREXIMBANK), Cairo, as a Director and Global Head for Project and Asset-Based Finance for eleven (11) years. He also held executive leadership roles at Barclays Bank Ghana Limited (now ABSA Bank) as the Executive Director in charge of Corporate Banking, Ecobank Ghana Limited as the Head of Institutional Banking, and the erstwhile Trust Bank Limited.
Koﬁ has experience in International, Corporate/Institutional, Transaction Banking, Development 
Finance, Project, and Export Finance, with a track record in transforming businesses and sustainably growing revenue and balance sheet.
He led and structured several transactions worth over USD10 billion across the African 
continent (both public and private sectors) in di/uniFB00erent industries, including manufacturing, health care, telecommunication, energy (oil and gas), transport (ports, airports, rails, and roads), mining, agriculture, and manufacturing.
Koﬁ is an inspiring and energetic leader who is widely known for his collaborative leadership 
style and for building high-performance teams in delivering signiﬁcant bottom-line growth in uniquely challenging situations.
Koﬁ holds an Executive Masters Degree in Business Administration and a Bachelor of Science 
Degree in Agriculture, majoring in Economics, both from the University of Ghana.Mr. Koﬁ Adomakoh
Managing Director
Socrates is a ﬁnance professional with over 15 years’ experience in the Financial Services 
sector. He has a breadth of experience across strategy; business performance and reporting (ﬁnancial, regulatory and statutory); debt and capital raising; business combination; investment and risk management.  
Prior to joining GCB Bank in February 2016, he was the Finance Director of Fidelity Bank 
Ghana Limited.  Other positions he held at Fidelity include Head of Research and Head of Business Performance & Financial Control. He worked with UBA (Ghana) as Senior Analyst deputizing for the Financial Controller. He also worked with Export Finance Company Limited as Head of Finance & Administration and General Leasing & Finance Company Limited as Analyst for lease credit applications.
Socrates is a fellow of the Association of Chartered Certiﬁed Accountants (ACCA), having 
qualiﬁed by June 2003.  He holds a Master of Business Administration (Finance) degree from the University of Ghana Business School and a Bachelor of Commerce degree from the University of Cape Coast.  He is an alumnus of the Wharton Executive Education, University of Pennsylvania, USA.
Mr. Socrates Afram 
Deputy Managing Director, FinanceGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
16Executive Committee 
(EXCO) (Continued)
Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey joined GCB Bank PLC in December 2020. He has 20 years 
multinational experience working for listed companies in corporate and retail banking, asset management, securities, brokerage services, pensions, insurance and micro-ﬁnance with operations in over 30 African countries.
Mr. Lamptey started his career with KPMG and has since held other positions including Chief 
Financial O/uniFB03cer – WAMZ at Ecobank Ghana; Group Head, Finance at Ecobank Transnational Incorporated (Togo), Group Chief Operating O/uniFB03cer, Letshego Holdings Limited (Botswana) and Executive Business Manager to the Group CEO - Alexander Forbes Group Holdings (South Africa). 
Emmanuel also held several roles with Standard Bank of South Africa Group in South Africa 
and Ghana.
He holds a Bachelor of Commerce degree from University of Cape Coast, Ghana and is a fellow 
of the Association of Chartered Certiﬁed Accountants, United Kingdom. He is an alumnus of Harvard Business School, USA. Mr. Emmanuel 
Odartey Lamptey Deputy Managing Director, Operations
Mr. Aidoo has a wealth of experience in structuring, origination, trading and execution in the 
UK and several African markets including but not limited to Nigeria, Ghana, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Egypt, Ethiopia, and Botswana. 
Prior to joining GCB Bank, Sam worked at Fidelity Bank Ghana Ltd as the Deputy Managing 
Director (Wholesale Banking) with responsibility for the bank’s Corporate Banking, Financial Markets and Treasury, Capital Markets businesses as well as Fidelity Bank’s subsidiaries – Fidelity Asia Bank and Fidelity Securities Limited.
He also served on the Board of Fidelity Securities Limited. In his time at Fidelity bank, Sam was 
instrumental in the implementation of certain landmark transactions which include the ESLA Bond program and the Securitization of GOG Contractor arrears, just to mention a few.
Mr. Aidoo also worked for Barclays Africa as Director, Regional Head, Global Markets 
distribution looking after the North Africa and East African regions out of Nairobi-Kenya and subsequently looking after the West African business out of Lagos-Nigeria.
In his time with Barclays, he worked in senior roles in the ﬁnancial markets business in Ghana 
and subsequently for three years out of London, where he managed and coordinated Barclays Capital’s structured product o/uniFB00ering (Structured Assets, Index Products, ALM, Access Trades etc.) into and out of Sub-Saharan African markets.
He started his banking career with Standard Chartered Bank.Mr. Samuel Kwame 
Yedu AidooExec. Dir. Wholesale & Investment BankingGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
17
Mr. Theo Aryee is a seasoned risk management professional with over two decades of 
professional experience that extended beyond the shores of Ghana. He worked as Associate Corporate Credit Director in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, where he had credit sanctioning responsibilities across varied product specialisms, industries and borrower types in a number of African countries - Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Mauritius, Ghana and Seychelles. 
During this time, he also had oversight of the credit portfolio in Pakistan. Signiﬁcantly, he 
championed the successful role out and execution of the Credit Skills Development programme across India, The United Arab Emirates, Pakistan and a number of African countries. Theo served as Chief Risk O/uniFB03cer in GHL Bank. He is credited with the set-up of the Enterprise Risk Management framework, and the embedment of a business supportive risk culture across the bank. 
He joins us from First National Bank where he was in charge of the consumer and home loans 
credit portfolios. He started his banking career with Ecobank as a Risk Analyst. Over the course of his career, he has played key leadership roles in a number of functional areas, including enterprise risk management, corporate credit, retail credit, project ﬁnance, credit audit, coaching, training, collections, recoveries, process optimization, credit operations and general banking operations. 
Theo holds a Master’s degree in Business Administration from the University of Central 
Lancashire, England and a B Sc. (Hons) in Mining Engineering from the then UST School of Mines, Ghana. When he is not doing risk management, he does poetry, songwriting, preaching, marriage counselling, teaching, corporate coaching, and plays the bass guitar.Mr. Theophilus 
Ayitey Adjin Aryee   Chief Risk O/uniFB03cerExecutive Committee (EXCO) (Continued)
Jessie Jacintho was appointed General Counsel in 2016 and is responsible for leading the legal 
and debt recovery functions of the Bank. Jessie has 27 years’ experience as a lawyer. She has over twenty-two years’ experience as an in-house counsel having worked with Barclays Bank of Ghana now Absa Bank Ghana as legal counsel responsible as business partner for Corporate Banking, Risk Management, Treasury, Human Resources and Compliance functions.
Jessie also worked as General Counsel and Corporate A/uniFB00airs Director of the First Group Limited 
an investment and management company for one and a half years. During the same period Jessie doubled as the Acting Legal Director of Universal Merchant Bank an investee company of The First Group.
Prior to taking an in-house counsel role, Jessie worked as a private legal practitioner with the 
law ﬁrm Naoferg Chambers in Accra.
Jessie has a Bachelor of Laws Degree (LLB Hons) from the University of Ghana and professional 
legal qualiﬁcation from the Ghana School of Law. She also has an Executive Master’s Degree in Business Administration, Human Resource Option from the University of Ghana Business School and a certiﬁed Credit Administration Certiﬁcate from the Ghana Banking College among other professional development qualiﬁcations. Ms. Jessie Jacintho   
General CounselGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
18Executive Committee 
(EXCO) (Continued)
Nana Kwabena Yeboah (MCIPD) is a Generalist, Senior HR Management Professional and 
business leader with 20+ years of experience in hands-on, progressive and wide-ranging multinational experience across West Africa and the Middle East. 
Kwabena’s experience spans oil and gas (upstream, midstream, downstream), supply chain, 
FMCG, agri-business and training organizations. He has led the HR function in Shell Ghana (HR Manager), MRS/ex-Chevron (GM Human Resources & Administration), Olam Nigeria (GM-Human Resources), Petrofac Nigeria and Petrofac Training (Head of HR and HR Director respectively) and most recently, ZEN Petroleum (Group HR Director) in Ghana, Nigeria and the United Arab Emirates. Kwabena is recognized among his HR peers and business managers as a commercially aware enabler of business performance, and a trusted advisor. 
He has attended several HR and leadership development courses, including short courses at 
the London Business School, and also contributed to national policy development as Member of the Executive Committee of the Ghana Employers Association (GEA). 
He holds an MBA in General Management from the University of Hull Business School in the 
UK, as well as a First-Class degree in Political Science with Sociology from the University of Ghana, Legon, and is a member of and/or certiﬁed by a number of international HR professional bodies, including Chartered Membership of the CIPD in the UK, Senior Professional in HR (SPHR), US and the CIPM in Nigeria. He is passionate about professional development for young graduates and HR professionals, and the author of “What Employers Want in Graduates”. 
He has also served on the faculty of the HR Certiﬁcation Centre as a Facilitator for the 
Professional in Human Resources International (PHRi) and Senior Professional in Human Resources International (SPHRi) certiﬁcation courses. Kwabena is married with three children, a staunch supporter of Accra Hearts of Oak SC, a Formula 1 car racing enthusiast, as well as a Christian street theologian and apologetic.Nana Kwabena 
Yeboah  
Head, Human Resources
Mr. Eric Abeku Co/uniFB03e joined GCB Bank PLC e/uniFB00ective 14th February 2022 as Chief Digital & 
Marketing O/uniFB03cer to lead the Bank’s digital transformation agenda in line with our ambition to dominate the market.
Eric will partner with business units and functions to accelerate our digital transformation 
e/uniFB00orts to deliver superior client experience and improve shareholder value. He will also oversee and coordinate marketing activities across the bank.
Eric joins GCB Bank with over 20 years proven track record of driving growth in banking and 
telecommunication industries across Africa.  Prior to joining GCB Bank, he worked as Vice President, Products & Solutions at VISA CEMEA where he was responsible for developing, delivering, and activating strategies and product plans aimed at driving VISA’s competitive advantage and revenue growth agenda for products in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Eric also worked at Ecobank Transnational Incorporated, Kenya, Ghana & Togo as Group Head, 
Cards & Electronic Banking managing the deployment of digital platforms across 33 African countries. He also held several roles at subsidiaries of the Ecobank Group in Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Gambia. He started his banking career at the erstwhile Trust Bank Ghana Limited.
In the Telecommunication industry, Eric worked at Airtel B.V, Kenya, as Director Group 
M-commerce. He was also responsible for planning and managing Airtel mobile money business with complete proﬁt and loss accountability for the 14 operating subsidiaries.
He is a Chevening Scholar and holds an MBA (Marketing) from the University of Leeds Business 
School, UK, where he graduated as the best marketing student. He also holds a Postgraduate Diploma (Communication Studies), BA (Social Work & Administration) and BSc. Admin (Accounting) all from the University of Ghana.
Eric has attended several Executive Education programmes, including courses at Harvard 
Kennedy School, USA and the VISA Business School.Mr. Eric Co/uniFB03e    
Chief Digital Marketing O/uniFB03cerGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
19
John is a versatile Chartered Banker with over 20 years` experience in Retail Banking, Branch 
Operations and Credit Management. He is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants, Ghana, and a Fellow of the Chartered Institutes of Bankers, Ghana. John was called to the Ghana Bar as a Lawyer in 2016. He holds an MBA in Banking & Finance, an LLB, a Post-Graduate Certiﬁcate in Banking and Finance Law, a Post-Graduate Diploma in Corporate and Commercial Law, and an LLM in Corporate and Commercial Law from the University of London. John also holds a Bachelor of Commerce Degree from the University of Cape Coast.
He joined GCB in 2001 as a Management Trainee and was posted to Bawku where he had the 
opportunity to be engaged in all aspects of branch banking. He has played various roles in the Bank, including Branch Management, Credit Administration, Relationship Management, and Business Development. He managed ﬁve Branches of the Bank, including the High Street Branch, between 2007 and 2016 and has led the signiﬁcant growth of the businesses of those branches. John began the transformation of the Central Processing Centre of the Bank in 2016. In 2017, he became the General Manager of the Consumer Banking Department and was appointed Executive Head of the Retail Banking Department in 2021. He has been responsible for the signiﬁcant growth of the retail business of the Bank over the past six years.
John has a great interest in Banking Law and Practice and has authored various articles on 
various areas of Banking Law and Practice. He is a Part-time lecturer in Banking Law and Practice at the Chartered Institute of Bankers, Ghana.
Linus Kumi joined GCB Bank PLC in April 2021 from Fidelity Bank Ghana Limited, where he was 
Director of Multinational Corporates managing portfolios in Global and Regional Corporates, Mining, and Energy Sectors with additional responsibilities in Debt Capital Markets and Corporate Division of Fidelity Asia Bank (A wholly owned subsidiary based in Malaysia). In 2020, He was tasked in line with corporate strategy to re-establish the banks local prominence within the domestic space moving it from a 4% business contribution to a 18% by year end.
He also worked as Director, Financial Institutions with Standard Chartered Bank, Ghana. 
Leading teams in managing Correspondence Banking relationships with local and regional banks, Public Sector and Government related businesses.
He is a seasoned corporate banking professional with over 20 years’ experience in credit 
origination, structuring, ﬁnancial institutions solutions, trade ﬁnance, sovereign and corporate relationship management across 4 di/uniFB00erent banks. He has led various teams to win and close key transactions across the industry.
He is currently responsible for the Corporate Banking business where he leads in developing 
and executing strategies to attract and retain corporate clients, managing and mentoring a team of bankers, and maintaining relationships with key stakeholders. Under his leadership, the corporate banking business has negotiated and closed a number of industry signiﬁcant transactions.
Linus holds an MBA (Corporate Finance) from Stirling University, Scotland and a Bachelor of 
Science degree in Administration with majors in Banking and Finance from the University of Ghana Business School, Legon. He also holds a professional certiﬁcate in Project Appraisal and Risk Management from Fuqua Business School, Duke University, North Carolina.Mr. John Adamah    Executive Head, Retail Banking Department
Mr Linus Kumi     
Head, Corporate Banking DepartmentExecutive Committee (EXCO) (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
20Executive Committee 
(EXCO) (Continued)
Mr. Benjamin Kyei Armoo joined the Bank as Chief Compliance O/uniFB03cer on 1st July 2022 from 
Absa Bank Ghana Limited. He has over twenty (20) years working experience which includes eighteen (18) years in Compliance. His expertise in compliance spans Regulatory Relationship Management, Business Advisory, Anti-Money Laundering/ Financial Crime Management, Monitoring and Testing, Training, and Board and Management Reporting. He also has experience in Credit, Internal Control, Auditing and Accounting with exposure in Retail Banking, Banking Operations, Trade Finance, Wholesale Banking and Financial Market activities. 
He has played a leading role in setting up and reorganizing Compliance departments in 
previous employments and currently providing a leading support to the Board and Management in strengthening the Bank’s Compliance function. He is an expert in formulating and implementing Compliance, and Anti-Money Laundering, Combating the Financing of Terrorism and Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction (AML/CFT & P) Programmes. He has provided instrumental support to Company Secretaries and Boards in complying with regulatory changes and the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive.
Prior to joining the Bank, Benjamin held Key Management Personnel and Senior Management 
roles comprising Head of Regulatory Advisory and Compliance at Absa Bank Ghana Limited; Anti-Money Laundering Reporting O/uniFB03cer and Head, Regulatory A/uniFB00airs, Training and Monitoring at Fidelity Bank Ghana Limited. Prior to becoming a Key Management Personnel, he held several roles as a Regulatory A/uniFB00airs and Training Manager at Fidelity Bank, Compliance and Regulatory A/uniFB00airs O/uniFB03cer at Barclays Bank of Ghana (currently Absa) and Internal Control, Compliance and Monitoring O/uniFB03cer at United Bank for Africa (UBA) Ghana.
Benjamin is a Certiﬁed Compliance Professional (CCP) from International Academy of Business 
and Financial Management (IABFM) and Certiﬁed People Manager under the Harvard Manager Mentor Blended Learning Programme. He is also a registered member of the Association of Certiﬁed Anti-Money Laundering Specialist (ACAMS). He holds MSc. Accounting and Finance from the University of Northampton UK, MSc. Development Finance from the University of Ghana, and Bachelor of Education (Foundations) degree from University of Cape Coast.  
He brings on board, his people management skills and expertise to lead the Compliance Team 
to provide the needed support for the bank to achieve its strategy whiles operating within the regulatory regime.Mr Benjamin Kyei 
Armoo   Chief Compliance O/uniFB03cerGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
21Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018
Income Statement
Interest income 2,829,445  2,379,370  1,938,908  1,555,646  1,355,151 
Interest expense (721,943)  (484,527)  (430,210)  (387,194) (388,048)
Net interest income 2,107,502 1,894,843 1,508,698 1,168,452 967,103 
Fee and commission income 458,316  410,277  329,702  293,127  249,025 
Fee and commission expense (73,310)  (50,749)  (51,722)  (51,622)  (51,429)
Net fee and commission income 385,006  359,528 277,980 241,505 197,596 
Net trading income 487,226  157,540  166,628  141,745  90,638 
Other operating income 25,933  15,582  14,374  21,167  26,242 
Operating income 3,005,667 2,427,493 1,967,680 1,572,869 1,281,579 
Net impairment loss on ﬁnancial assets (2,105,259)  (324,800)  (219,647)  (75,521) (60,011)
Operating expenses (1,631,952)  (1,263,747)  (1,129,641)  (924,583) (776,650)
Operating proﬁt (731,544) 838,946 618,392 572,765 444,918 
Share of proﬁt of associates, net of tax  (11,915)  (6,972)  (7,566)  903  5,256 
Proﬁt before income tax (743,459) 831,974 610,826 573,668 450,174 
Income tax expense 150,061  (188,836)  (135,096)  (116,978)  (101,112)
National ﬁscal stabilization levy  -     (40,490)  (30,341)  (28,233)  (22,321)
Financial sector recovery levy  -     (30,368)  -     -     -    
Proﬁt for the year  (593,398) 572,280 445,389 428,457 326,741 
Other Comprehensive Income:Items that will not be reclassiﬁed to proﬁt 
or loss
Remeasurements on net deﬁned beneﬁt 
liability/asset  (10,097)  4,540  14,192  (16,528)  26,257 
Fair value of equity instruments  17,014  284  (4,113)  (27,944)  -    
Income tax relating to items that will not be reclassiﬁed (7,068)  629  3,977  5,288  (6,564)
Total items that will not be reclassiﬁed to proﬁt or loss (151)  5,453  14,056  (39,184)  19,693 
Items that may be reclassiﬁed to proﬁt or loss
Exchange di/uniFB00erences on translating foreign 
operations 32,887  (8,836)  (1,211)  18,524  (3,903)
Fair value changes on ﬁnancial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income -     -     -     -     (14,792)Five Year Financial 
Summary
Statement of Comprehensive Income - GroupGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
22Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018
Share of comprehensive income of associates  (6,437)  (4,314)  401  2,321  (2,050)
Net gain on equity investments  -     14,139  -     -     -    
Income tax relating to items that may be 
reclassiﬁed -     -     -     -     4,010 
Fair value changes on available for sale ﬁnancial assets -     -     -     -     -    
Foreign currency translation di/uniFB00erence for foreign operation -     -     -     -     -    
Total items that may be reclassiﬁed to proﬁt or loss26,450  989 (810) 20,845 (16,735)
Other comprehensive income, net of taxation26,299 6,442 13,246 (18,339) 2,958 
Total comprehensive income for the year (567,099) 578,722 458,635 410,118 329,699 
Basic and diluted earnings per share (in GH¢) (2.24) 2.16 1.68 1.62  1.23 Statement of Comprehensive Income - Group (continued)Five Year Financial 
Summary (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
23Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents  4,476,878  2,301,092  1,567,241  1,572,538  1,953,620 
Non-pledged trading Assets  275,992  477,658  221,339  142,790  80,004 
Derivative ﬁnancial instruments  -     -     -     236  -    
Investment (other than securities)  43,346  26,366  18,534  35,439  41,275 
Loans and advances to customers  5,482,215  4,306,380  3,612,588  3,587,653  2,799,041 
Advances to banks  229,115  201,030  200,904  209,614  212,986 
Investment securities  8,673,601  9,765,840  8,622,846  6,025,382  4,646,034 
Investment in associates  92,678  82,280  91,681  100,391  81,482 
Investment in subsidiary  100  -     -     -     -    
Deferred tax asset  758,124  238,171  158,465  95,324  47,872 
Current tax asset  5,980  -     25,808  -     1,067 
Intangible assets  123,752  168,226  191,136  201,820  190,901 
Other assets  902,983  536,552  462,701  280,555  429,396 
Property, equipment and right-of-use-assets  429,654  301,332  280,654  272,342  237,247 
Total assets 21,494,418 18,404,927 15,453,897 12,524,084 10,720,925 
Liabilities
Deposits from banks & other ﬁnancial 
institutions 259,147  747,589  615,418  501,911  272,769 
Deposits from customers  17,515,911  13,154,527  11,345,240  9,320,878  8,024,425 
Borrowings  1,003,168  988,073  772,525  457,578  344,884 
Current tax liabilities  -     56,247  -     9,017  -    
Employee beneﬁt obligations  129,596  113,464  113,322  118,664  97,647 
Other liabilities  587,724  646,556  421,394  335,674  531,456 
Total liabilities  19,495,546  15,706,456 13,267,899  10,743,722  9,271,181 
Equity
Stated capital  500,000  500,000  500,000  500,000  500,000 
Retained earnings  821,937  1,547,835  1,111,387  828,873  585,167 
Statutory reserve  639,555  639,555  569,971  460,096  354,845 
Fair value reserve  21,030  14,997  5,395  1,581  26,048 
Other reserves  16,350  (3,916)  (755)  (10,188)  (16,316)
Total shareholders' equity  1,998,872  2,698,471  2,185,998  1,780,362  1,449,744 
Total liabilities and  shareholders' equity  21,494,418  18,404,927 15,453,897 12,524,084 10,720,925 Statement of Financial Position - GroupFive Year Financial Summary (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
24Financial Highlights - 
Group
11,961 13,902 17,775 
22%
16%28%
!"'"#!"#'"$!"$'"%!"%'"&!"&'"'!"
! "% % % $ # !% % % $ & !% % % $ ' !% % % $ ( !% % % $ % ) !% % % $ # ) !% % % $ & ) !% % % $ ' ) !% % % $ ( ) !% % % $ % # !
2020 2021 2022CUSTOMER DEPOSIT(GHS 'M)
1,968 2,427 3,006 
25%23% 24%
!"#!"$!"%!"&!"'!"(!")!"
*+*'!!*#,!!!*#,'!!*$,!!!*$,'!!*%,!!!*%,'!!
2020 2021 2022OPERATING I NCOME(GHS 'M)
611832
-743 7%36%
-189% +$'!"+$!!"+#'!"+#!!"+'!"!"'!"#!!"#'!"$!!"
*-.!!/*-)!!/*-'!!/*-%!!/*-#!!/*#!!*%!!*'!!*)!!*.!! 2020 2021 2022PROFIT BEFORE TAX(GHS 'M)
3,6134,3065,482
1%19%27%
+#!"!"#!"$!"%!"&!"'!"
! "% % % $ ) !% % % $ # !% % % $ * !% % % $ & !% % % $ + !% % % $ ' !
2020 2021 2022LOANS AND ADVA NCES(GHS 'M)
168216
-2244%29%
-204%+$'!"+$!!"+#'!"+#!!"+'!"!"'!"#!!"#'!"
. % + # - !. % % # - !. % + ) - !. % % ) - !. % + - !! "% + !% % ) !% + ) !% % # !% + # !
2020 2021 2022EPS(GHS' M)
15,454 18,405 21,494 
23%
19%17%
!"'"#!"#'"$!"$'"%!"%'"&!"&'"'!"
'!'()###'&#)###'&()###'%#)###'%()###
2020 2021 2022TOTAL ASSETS(GHS 'M)
22%25%
-25%-19%14%
-200% +$'!"+$!!"+#'!"+#!!"+'!"!"'!"
!"#$!%#$!&#$#$&#$%#$"#$
2020 2021 2022RETURN ON  EQUITY(ROE)
2.9% 3.1%
-2.8%
-28%8%
-189%+$'!"+$!!"+#'!"+#!!"+'!"!"'!"#!!"#'!"
, & ", * ", # ", ) "% ,) ,# ,* ,& ,
2020 2021 2022RETURN ON ASSETS(ROA)
20.5% 20.9%
17.9%
-2%2%
-15%
+$!"+#!"!"#!"$!"%!"&!"'!"
#$($&#$&($%#$%($
2020 2021 2022CAPITAL ADEQUACY RATIO
57.4%52.1% 54.3%
-2%
-9%4%
+$!"+#!"!"#!"$!"%!"&!"'!"
#$&#$%#$"#$*#$(#$+#$,#$
2020 2021 2022COST TO I NCOME 
Commercial 285 
Corporate 649 
Others 35 
Retail 1,245 Treasury 792 REVE NUE PER SEGMENT(GHS 'M)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
25Chairman’s Statement
Despite this challenge, I am 
pleased to inform you that GCB Bank PLC remains a viable business with distinct competitive advantages in the marketplace.Mr. Jude Koﬁ Arthur
Board Chairman
Introduction
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, I welcome you 
once again to the Annual General Meeting of your company, GCB Bank PLC. 
We started the year 2022 very well with a continued 
focus on our strategy to drive revenue and proﬁtable growth, enhance the resilience of our balance sheet and reinforce the core strengths of the Bank. 
In the latter part of the year, speciﬁcally on 5th December 
2022, the Government of Ghana launched the Domestic Debt Exchange Programme (DDEP) as part of e/uniFB00orts to address the economic crisis and bring the country’s debt to sustainable levels. Under the DDEP the government invited certain holders of domestic notes and bonds issued by the Government to exchange them for a package of new bonds with lower coupons and longer tenors.  
This programme which is intended to pave the way and 
lay a sound foundation for economic recovery also has a signiﬁcant impact on the economy and on the ﬁnancial performance of Banks that participated in the program including GCB,
Despite this challenge, I am pleased to inform you that 
GCB Bank PLC remains a viable business with distinct competitive advantages in the marketplace. Your Bank has strong fundamentals and signiﬁcant potential for further growth and value creation for its shareholders. 
Please permit me to touch brieﬂy on the global economic 
environment, how it has impacted the Ghanaian economy and our operating environment and then share key highlights of a robust and comprehensive capital plan authorized by the Board to address the challenges posed by the DDEP. I will also update you on our ﬁnancial performance for 2022 and our strategic priorities going forward.
Ladies and Gentlemen, as you are no doubt aware, this 
year also marks the 70th anniversary of your Bank. I shall in this report apprise you of an all-inclusive framework for celebrating our anniversary. 
Global Economic Environment
Developments in the global environment weighed in heavily on economic growth resulting in a decline from 6.2 per cent in 2021 to 3.4 per cent in 2022. Some of the factors contributing to the decline include: rising energy and commodity prices; record levels of inﬂation and turnaround in interest-rate policy around the world. The devastating impact of COVID-19 in China also dampened growth in 2022. According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) growth is projected to decline further to 2.8 per cent in 2023. 
The balance of risks to global growth in 2023 remains 
tilted to the downside. Severe health outcomes in China could hold back economic recovery and along with geopolitical fragmentation and tightened global ﬁnancing conditions hamper economic progress. 
On the upside, a stronger boost from pent-up demand in 
numerous economies or a faster fall in inﬂation are plausible. China’s recent lifting of COVID restrictions has also paved the way for a faster-than-expected recovery. These external developments had a profound impact on our domestic economy.GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
26Ghanaian Economy & the Operating Environment
The combined e/uniFB00ect of the adverse external events 
exposed Ghana to a surge in inﬂation, a large exchange rate depreciation, and stress on the ﬁnancing of the Government budget at a time when the economy was just beginning to recover from the pandemic. 
It is worth noting that global risk aversion triggered large 
capital outﬂows, and the loss of external market access resulted in increased domestic borrowing costs.  
Ghana’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate 
declined to 3.1 per cent in 2022 from 5.1 per cent in 2021. The observed growth outturn was driven by the services and agriculture sectors with a growth of 4.2% and 5.5% respectively.
Inﬂation remained elevated in 2022, driven mainly by 
demand pressures, currency depreciation, transport, utility costs and supply disruptions. Inﬂation recorded a signiﬁcant jump to 54.1 per cent in December 2022, from 12.6 per cent in 2021. Interest rates on the money market increased in tandem with inﬂation across the yield curve. The monetary policy rate shot up by 1,250 basis points(bps) to 27 per cent from 14.5 per cent in December 2021.
The local currency came under intense pressure in the 
year under review, reﬂecting portfolio reversals, lower foreign direct investment inﬂows, and enhanced demand pressures.  This resulted in signiﬁcant depreciation of the Ghana cedi against major currencies. For the year 2022, the Ghana Cedi depreciated by 30.0 per cent against the US dollar, after reversals of some of the losses in December 2022. Depreciation of the cedi to the dollar was 4.1 per cent in 2021. To address the above challenges and position the economy on a recovery path, the DDEP was launched as part of a comprehensive agenda by government to protect the economy and enhance our capacity to service public debt at sustainable levels. 
On the Banking industry, total assets of the industry 
stood at GHS209.4 billion in December 2022, representing a growth of 16.4 percent, attributable to growth in deposits and currency translation e/uniFB00ect. Total credit increased by 28.5 percent to GH69.1 billion in December 2022 from GHS53.8 billion in December 2021. Total deposits stood at GHS157.9 billion, representing an increase of 30.4 percent year-on-year, compared with 16.6 percent recorded during the same period in 2021.
The DDEP resulted in signiﬁcant impairment loss on 
investments in government securities and consequently a deterioration in the capital position of banks. In order to mitigate the impact on the banking sector, the Bank of Ghana introduced regulatory forbearance on capital. The minimum Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) required to be maintained by banks was reduced from 13 percent to 10 percent as of 31st December 2022, and losses from the DDEP are to be reﬂected in the computation of CAR over a period of up to three (3) years.
The average capital adequacy ratio for the industry was 
15.7 percent in December 2022 largely supported by the regulatory reliefs, compared with 16.6 percent as of December 2021 without the DDEP. 
Financial Performance
During the year, the implementation of our strategy resulted in strong quarterly ﬁnancial performance. However, the DDEP signiﬁcantly a/uniFB00ected our full year ﬁnancial performance for 2022. 
The Bank generated a record revenue of GHS3.0 billion 
representing an increase of 24% or GHS578.2 million compared to 2021. The growth was mainly driven by 11% increase in Net Interest Income and a 7% rise in Net fees and commissions. Net Trading income was up by 209% largely from margins from foreign exchange trading on account of currency volatility. The Net Interest Income contributed 70% of our total revenue with the Non-Interest Income accounting for the remaining 30%. Operating expenses increased by 29% largely due to cedi depreciation against the USD and the surge in inﬂation to 54.1% from 12.6%. These resulted in a cost to income ratio of 54.4% in 2022 compared to 52.6% in 2021. 
The Bank recorded a Loss Before Tax of GHS743.5 million 
in 2022 compared to a Proﬁt before Tax of GHS832.0 million in the prior year. This loss is largely due to the impairment loss on investment in government securities of GHS1.8 billion. It is worth noting that our projected proﬁt for the Year 2022 without the impairment would have been in excess of GHS1.0 billion.
Customer deposits grew by 28% from GHS13.9 billion in 
2021 to GHS17.8 billion in 2022. We are eternally grateful for the business of our cherished customers. Our balance sheet remained strong, growing from GHS18.4 billion in 2021 to GHS21.5 billion in 2022. Total equity of the Bank declined by 39% from GHS2.7 billion in 2021 to GHS2.0 billion in 2022 on the back of impaired investments in securities due to the DDEP.
Turning to the stock market developments, during the 
year, the Ghana Stock Exchange (GSE) Composite Index depreciated by 12.38% whilst the GSE Financial Stock Index declined by 4.61%. Our Bank’s share price also declined by 24.81% in 2022 and closed the year at GHS3.94 from GHS5.24 in 2021, which also reﬂected the general market performance.Chairman’s Statement 
(Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
27Domestic Debt Exchange Program (DDEP) – 
Challenges 
Ladies and Gentlemen, businesses operating in this 
country have a stake in the recovery of the Ghanaian economy. It is against this background that we evaluated the programme focusing on the best options open to us.  
The DDEP was an invitation for the voluntary exchange 
of about GHS130 billion of the domestic bonds of the Republic for a package of new bonds with lower coupons and longer tenors. The program is part of a comprehensive strategy aimed at bringing the public debt stock back to sustainable level and to unlock ﬁnancial assistance from the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Your Bank exchanged a total amount of GHS6.784 billion being the value of Eligible Bonds under the DDEP. Under International Financial Reporting Standards shortfalls in the recoverable amounts of ﬁnancial assets are required to be reﬂected in the income statement as an impairment charge. Your Bank’s participation in the DDEP resulted in an impairment loss of GHS1.8 billion for the year. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, your Bank due to the adequate 
build-up of retained earnings in the past was able to absorb this impairment loss and maintain an adequate capital bu/uniFB00er with regulatory forbearance. The Board reviewed the risk weights attached to the new bonds and noted the potential of illiquidity in the market for bonds which were subject to be exchanged.
Against this background and the relevance of the DDEP 
as a critical component of the debt reduction program and the IMF programme, concluded that participation in the DDEP was in the best long-term interest of the Bank and its shareholders.
The Bank accordingly, participated in the DDEP, to 
preserve value to shareholders, reinforce its competitive advantage and secure the future of the Bank.
Our Response to the DDEP
The DDEP adversely impacted on the Bank’s capital adequacy ratio due to the impairment loss of GHS1.8 billion for the year. Excluding the adjustment related to the regulatory capital forbearance your Bank’s capital adequacy was 7.59% at the end of December 2022 compared to a prudential limit of 13%. This reﬂects a signiﬁcant decline in the capital adequacy ratio at the end of September 2022 of 17.7%. The reported capital adequacy ratio at the end of 2022 taking into consideration the capital forbearance was 17.86%. 
The Bank of Ghana as part of measures to mitigate the 
impact of the DDEP on the banking sector has suspended dividends until further notice. In compliance with this regulatory directive, the directors are unable to recommend dividend for 2022. 
In order to address the impact of the DDEP, the Bank has 
developed a robust and comprehensive capital plan. The immediate priority of the Bank reﬂected in this capital plan is to rebuild capital, further strengthen liquidity while we continue to boost our earnings generation capacity especially from non-funded sources. 
Based on the capital plan we seek your support to raise 
additional capital of GHS1 billion to:
a. meet regulatory capital adequacy ratio requirements;
b. enhance our deal-making capacity and take advantage 
of opportunities available to the Bank while preserving our core strengths;
c. strengthen access to funding markets and bolster 
conﬁdence in the Bank; and 
d. support targeted and prioritized investment in digital 
transformation and ultimately help to drive our 
business strategy. 
Following a review of the risk appetite and opportunities 
in our operating environment as part of the capital planning process, the Board has concluded that it is appropriate to maintain a capital adequacy ratio in excess of 14.0% by the end of 2023 and rebuild the ratio to at least 18.0% by 2025.
In order to limit dilution and maintain a high quality and 
e/uniFB03cient capital structure we are of the view that the most appropriate way to strengthen our capital base is through a combination of additional equity capital, internal capital generation through retention of proﬁts and revaluation of landed property. Accordingly, the Board seeks the approval of shareholders to raise additional equity capital of GHS1 billion by way of Common Equity Tier 1 capital of GHS750 million and Additional Tier 1 capital of GHS250 million preference shares. All information on the capital raise and the relevant resolutions to be passed are contained in the Shareholder Circular and the letter to shareholders forwarded to your good selves together with the notice and agenda relating to the 29th Annual General Meeting. We urge you to support the proposals of your Board.
Progress on our Strategic Priorities
Ladies and Gentlemen, in all these developments your Bank remains focused in its pursuit of its market dominance strategy.  Over the last two years of the implementation of our market dominance strategy, we have distinguished ourselves with impressive growth in core business. Chairman’s Statement (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
28I would like to share with you the key priorities we 
worked on in 2022, the progress we achieved and highlight our outlook going forward.
In order to ensure we maintain our competitive 
advantage and generate sustainable returns it is critical that we continue to invest in the future of the Bank, especially in our digital transformation agenda to enable us exploit opportunities and address potential risks and challenges in our market environment. 
We have made good progress with regards to the 
implementation of our leadership and succession planning framework which seeks to ensure that the Bank has a pool of talent with relevant skills and capacity to support its market dominance agenda. 
During the year we developed a best-in-class customer 
experience strategy for the Bank, ensuring uniform banking services across all our touch points. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, as we seek to strengthen risk 
management, enhance our operational resilience and improve our service to clients we will sustain our investment in key strategic areas, enhance our resilience and improve our business risk complexion. 
Corporate Social Responsibility
The Bank lived up to its commitment of supporting society, particularly in health, education and environment. 
During the year we spent over GHS 21 million in various 
initiatives spread equitably across our focus areas. 
Governance
The Board is committed to excellence in corporate governance. In line with best practice the Board regularly evaluates its e/uniFB00ectiveness and that of its committees and ensures that our governance protocols are consistent with both the Bank of Ghana and Securities and Exchange Commission Directives and best industry practice.
The Bank’s 70th Anniversary
This year marks a signiﬁcant milestone of the Bank, its 70th anniversary. The Bank commenced its operations in 1953 as the Bank of Gold Coast (BGC) to provide banking services. The Bank was wholly owned by government until 1996 when it was restructured and listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange. Today, government of Ghana owns 21.36% of the bank while institutional and individual holdings add up to 78.64%. Over the years, your Bank’s competitive position has continually improved and remains a leading bank with signiﬁcant potential for sustainable and proﬁtable growth. Our deep connection and commitment to the Ghanaian economy and the banking sector have guided all our activities and for the last seven decades it has exhibited a sterling track record of creating value for its shareholders. We shall during the anniversary celebration recognize the contributions of all stakeholders who have been part of the growth of GCB Bank.
Conclusion
We are well positioned to take advantage of considerable growth opportunities in our environment as we navigate an uncertain external environment in the year 2023 under an IMF programme. Ghana’s GDP growth is estimated to be low, but the country o/uniFB00ers prospects and opportunities for sustainable and proﬁtable growth in the years ahead. The Board will continue to ensure an appropriate balance of investment and risk as we deliver on our mandate.  
I would like at this time to say a big thank you to our 
shareholders for the trust placed in us and for your ongoing support of the Bank. We are conﬁdent that our economy will bounce back and accordingly urge you to vote in favour of the proposed resolutions under the special business as well as the ordinary business at the AGM to place your Bank in a stronger position to deliver on its mandate. 
I would like to recognize our customers for their 
continued support and business. Their custom underpins our success.
I salute our Management and Sta/uniFB00 for their dedication, 
diligence and commitment to the success of the Bank. Your collective e/uniFB00orts, team spirit and resilience have contributed immensely to delivering quality services and value to our customers and stakeholders during this di/uniFB03cult and challenging year. 
On behalf of the Board of Directors, I say to you all, 
thank you and I wish you a happy 70th anniversary. 
Thank you once again for the privilege of serving.
Jude Koﬁ Arthur
ChairmanChairman’s Statement 
(Continued)
Lookingtopurchaseavehicle
oranassetabroad?YoucanmakeallyourForeignTransfersthroughGCBBank.#DoYourThing
Visitthenearestbranchtoapply.GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
29
Lookingtopurchaseavehicle
oranassetabroad?YoucanmakeallyourForeignTransfersthroughGCBBank.#DoYourThing
Visitthenearestbranchtoapply.GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
30
We are relentless in the pursuit of 
our ambition to dominate the market and are conﬁdent that we will navigate well the challenges that confront us and emerge a stronger, resilient and customer 
focused bank. 
 Mr. Koﬁ Adomakoh
Managing Director
Dear Shareholders,
Introduction 
In 2022, GCB Bank witnessed a huge set back in its 
ﬁnancial performance. Amid a background that included record levels of inﬂation, turnaround in interest-rate policy around the world, the protracted war in Ukraine and particularly an unprecedented Domestic Debt Exchange Programme (DDEP) in Ghana, GCB Bank recorded a loss for the year 2022. 
Despite this set back GCB Bank remains viable with 
signiﬁcant potential for delivering sustainable proﬁt growth and enhanced value to shareholders. We are on course in the execution of our strategies to realise our ambition to dominate the market, and this is reﬂected in the improvement in our core business metrics.
In this report, I will share with you the progress we have 
made in the past year and our key focus areas going forward. 
Operating & Economic Environment
The global economic growth slowed from 6.2 percent in 2021 to 3.4 percent in 2022. Tightened ﬁnancial conditions, economic uncertainties, the ever-worsening impact of climate change, mounting debt vulnerabilities, the lingering e/uniFB00ects of the COVID-19 pandemic and other factors stated earlier weighed heavily on economic growth.  
The Ghanaian economy encountered signiﬁcant 
challenges in 2022 due to the rippling e/uniFB00ect of external economic pressures and the adverse e/uniFB00ect of the DDEP. The domestic economy contracted, with real Gross Domestic Product growth rate dropping from 5.1 percent at the end of 2021 to 3.1 percent in 2022. In 2022, the services sector emerged as the most signiﬁcant contributor to the economy, accounting for 44.9 percent of GDP. It was followed by the Industry sector with a share of 34.2 percent and the Agriculture sector with a share of 20.9 percent.
Price pressures in the Ghanaian economy remained high 
in 2022, resulting in a signiﬁcant increase in inﬂation. The year ended with inﬂation reaching 54.1 percent compared to 12.6 percent recorded in 2021. The upturn in headline inﬂation was driven by food and non-food price pressures, inﬂuenced by local and imported components in the consumer price basket. Key factors contributing to the high inﬂation included high transport and utility costs and sharp currency depreciation. To address the increasing inﬂation, the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of Ghana progressively increased the Policy rate from 14.5 percent in January 2022 to 27.0 percent at the end of the year.  
Interest rates experienced signiﬁcant increases across 
di/uniFB00erent maturities during the year. 
The Ghanaian Cedi consistently depreciated against the 
major foreign currencies throughout the year. By the end of the year, the Cedi had lost 30.0 percent of its value against the United States Dollar, 21.2 percent against the British Pound Sterling, and 25.3 percent against the Euro. 
The government’s access to the international capital 
market was compromised in 2022 when the top three global rating agencies unanimously downgraded Ghana’s credit rating. This downgrade resulted in o/uniFB00shore investors’ portfolio reversals, which put signiﬁcant pressure on the local currency. Managing Director’s 
Review of Operations and PerformanceGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
31As part of measures to protect the economy and achieve 
debt sustainability, the government launched the DDEP on 5th December 2022. The DDEP was, among other pre-conditions, set by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) as part of the government’s request for a USD 3 Billion balance of payments support. All commercial Banks with investments in the eligible Bonds under the DDEP, including GCB Bank, voluntarily participated in the program. 
The recent IMF Executive Board approval of a US$3 
Billion Extended Credit Facility Arrangement for Ghana along with other planned and wide-ranging reforms by government to restore macroeconomic stability and debt sustainability has instilled conﬁdence in the economic recovery of Ghana and generated renewed hope for improved proﬁts and returns to our shareholders. 
Operational Performance
During the year under review the successful execution of our strategy contributed to growth in our core business, strengthening operational resilience and driving our people and talent agenda. 
Driving Revenue Growth and Proﬁtability
The number of clients we serve continue to grow across our business segments through improved relationship management, marketing and stronger internal collaboration. This coupled with our intensiﬁed focus on cross selling generated growth in non-funded income at a rate faster than net interest income growth rate. 
We embarked on a comprehensive review of our Retail 
and Commercial Banking operating model, focusing on enhancing sales orientation and optimising the customer experience. 
GCB Bank’s branch network has remained a cornerstone 
of our success complemented by our growing portfolio of digital solutions, providing a competitive edge in the market. We opened a new branch in Nalerigu, the capital of the Northeast Region of Ghana. This notable achievement establishes GCB Bank PLC as the ﬁrst universal Bank in the country to establish and operate a branch in this region since its recent creation. This reinforces our commitment to driving the national ﬁnancial inclusion agenda and serving the people of Nalerigu and the surrounding communities through our comprehensive portfolio of convenient banking products, services, and cutting-edge digital solutions. 
With the addition of the Nalerigu branch, our total 
branch network in the Northern sector of Ghana has increased to twenty (20), and one hundred and eighty-six (186) branches nationwide. Enhancing Operational E/uniFB03ciency and Resilience
We remain committed to improving our technology infrastructure, ensuring it provides the reliable backbone for our core operations and enable us to deliver exceptional customer service. During the year we made investments to improve the performance of our systems. These investments have signiﬁcantly reduced processing time and allowed us to focus on providing a more delightful customer experience across all touchpoints. 
We have taken signiﬁcant measures to strengthen the 
Bank’s cyber security framework in response to the constantly evolving cyber threat landscape. Our e/uniFB00orts include the implementation of the internationally recognised ISO 27001 standard, which has provided us with a comprehensive and structured approach to managing information security risks.
We are also proud to announce that we have become a 
member of the Forum for Incident Response and Security Teams (FIRST). This membership allows GCB to tap into the expertise and knowledge of a leading body dedicated to equipping organisations with the necessary tools and best practices to enhance their response capabilities during cyberattacks.
During the year we reinforced our risk organisation and 
culture through training and have also reviewed risk ownership and accountability especially in the ﬁrst line of defence. Through a collaborative e/uniFB00ort we have aligned priorities for risk going forward and implemented enhancements to the ﬁrst and second lines of defence. Through the e/uniFB00ective implementation of our combined assurance framework, internal controls have been improved and are operating e/uniFB00ectively. Our process optimisation initiatives were expanded during the year to cover our trade ﬁnance operations, our centralised back o/uniFB03ce processing centre and other areas of the bank leading to noticeable process improvements and faster turnaround time. 
Leadership & Talent Development 
The commitment and dedication of our management and sta/uniFB00 played a pivotal role in our successes and performance in 2022. We fostered a continuous learning and development culture, empowering our employees with the essential skills and knowledge to thrive in an ever-changing market.
To reinforce our relationship management approach, we 
realigned our focus towards enhancing sales e/uniFB00ectiveness, creating customer value and delivering exceptional experiences. We prioritised reskilling and upskilling of our customer-facing sta/uniFB00 through a modular Managing Director’s Review of Operations 
and Performance (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
32training program designed to improve their selling skills 
and prepare them for more senior roles. 
Further, we implemented Executive Mentorship 
programs across the Regions and Branches, providing valuable guidance and support to Regional and Branch Managers to drive performance and resolve operational challenges.
Building capacity and training a cadre of next-generation 
leaders is paramount to Management and the Board. This has been prioritised as a core element of our Employee Value Proposition. Under the leadership and guidance of the Board, we have made good progress in developing a Leadership Pipeline and Succession Planning framework that would harness talent and train leaders to take up senior positions in the Bank. 
To strengthen sta/uniFB00 engagement, we organised Human 
Resource Clinics, Strategy Roadshows, and other social programs to foster a sense of belonging and collaboration across the Bank. 
These initiatives collectively reinforced our commitment 
to our employees’ growth and development, enabling our sta/uniFB00 to excel in their roles and adapt to the evolving needs of our customers and the industry.
Financial Performance
GCB Bank has a proven track record of generating strong revenue, proﬁt and balance sheet growth over the years leveraging its distinct advantages and core strengths. In all our business decisions we are guided by our purpose and creating value for shareholders in a sustainable way. 
We did not take the decision to participate in the DDEP 
lightly noting the signiﬁcant impact it will have on proﬁts and the capital adequacy of the bank. The Bank participated in the DDEP to avoid further deterioration in the capital adequacy ratio due to the higher regulatory risk weighting on bonds that are not exchanged and eliminate the risk of not realising value from the eligible bonds due to liquidity limitations. 
The DDEP adversely impacted our performance for the 
year and our capital adequacy ratio. 
GCB recorded a Loss Before Tax of GHS 743.5 million in 
2022 compared to a Proﬁt before Tax of GHS 832.0 million in the prior year. The loss is attributable to a GHS 1.8 billion impairment loss on investment in government securities following the Bank’s participation in the DDEP. 
In order to lessen the impact of the DDEP on the banking 
sector the Bank of Ghana granted regulatory reliefs. The Central Bank has reduced the minimum capital adequacy ratio from 13 percent to 10 percent as of 31 December 2022 and losses from the DDEP are to be reﬂected in the computation of capital adequacy ratio over a period of up to three years. The Bank of Ghana has also suspended payment of dividends until further notice. 
GCB Bank’s capital adequacy ratio was 7.6 percent at the 
end of December 2022, below the regulatory limit and signiﬁcantly below the capital adequacy ratio 20.9 percent at end of December 2021. The capital adequacy ratio adjusted for the reliefs at the end of December 2022 was 17.9 percent. 
I would like to turn your attention to the continued and 
improved growth in our revenues and balance sheet which is the outcome of executing well on our strategy. 
Despite the loss for the year, GCB Bank delivered 
improved and strong double-digit growth in revenue and pre provision proﬁt supported by balance sheet expansion, growth in the number of clients, a rising share of our clients businesses as well as high adoption rates in our digital o/uniFB00erings. 
GCB recorded remarkable growth in operating income 
from GHS 2,427.5 million in 2021 to GHS 3,005.7 million, representing a 24 percent growth. The growth was broad-based across our major income lines and reﬂected our well-diversiﬁed business. Net interest income rose from GHS 1,894.8 million in 2021 to GHS 2,107.5 million in 2022, indicating an increase of 11 percent. The growth was supported by higher volumes and yields on earning assets. 
Net fees and commissions income increased by 7 
percent, reaching GHS 385.0 million in 2022, driven by fees from loan book growth, growth in the number of new clients and higher transaction volume.  The growth in our revenue reﬂects our core strengths and continuing focus on executing our 4-year strategy which began in 2020 to achieve revenue growth and proﬁtability, operational excellence and drive our people and talent agenda. Managing Director’s 
Review of Operations and Performance 
(Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
331,5091,8952,108278360385
181173516
-50010001,5002,0002,5003,0003,500
2020 2021 2022Income (GHS'M)
Net Interest Income Net Fee & Commission Income Other income
Total operating expenses, which comprise personnel 
expenses and other expenses, grew by 29 percent to GHS 1,632.0 billion in 2022. Personnel expenses growth was due to inﬂation-related salary adjustments. It increased by 25 percent from GHS 641.6 million in 2021 to GHS 801.6 million in 2022. Other expenses also escalated by 43 percent to GHS 676.1 million in 2022, attributable to the combined e/uniFB00ect of the cedi depreciation against the USD and high inﬂation . Our ongoing cost management initiative, including the review of major contracts and strict discipline on cost helped to contain our cost growth. Pre-provision proﬁt continued to improve and increased by 22 percent to GHS1.4 billion. The Bank’s cost-to-income ratio increased marginally from 53.0 percent in 2021 to 54.0 percent in 2022. 
Total assets increased by 17 percent, from 18,404.9 million 
in 2021 to GHS 21,494.4 million in 2022. The growth was primarily driven by increased loans and advances, which grew by 27 percent year-on-year from GHS 4,306.4 million in 2021 to GHS 5,482.2 million. The Bank experienced signiﬁcant growth in customer deposits, reaching GHS 17,791.4 million, a 28 percent increase over the previous year. The deposit growth was driven by new customer acquisition, growth in transaction Banking business and collections on our digital platforms and increased wallet share of existing clients’ businesses. The setup of the Micro and Small Enterprises segment within the retail segment to focus on deposit mobilisation also contributed to the deposit growth. 
 
 15,454  18,405  21,494 
-5,00010,00015,00020,00025,000
2020 2021 20229,989 11,340 14,747 11,968 13,913 17,791 
-5,00010,00015,00020,00025,00030,00035,000
2020 2021 2022
CASA Deposits Total DepositsTotal Assets (GHS'M) Deposits (GHS 'M)
      Total impairment loss increased by 548 percent to GHS 
2,105.3 million. Impairment loss comprises impairment loss on investment securities and impairment loss on loans. Impairment loss on investment securities accounted for 87 percent of the total impairment loss. Impairment loss on loans declined by 16 percent, from GHS 325.0 million in 2021 to GHS 274.0 million in 2022.   
2,186 2,698 
1,999 
-5001,0001,5002,0002,5003,000
2020 2021 2022611832
(743)
(800)(600)(400)(200)-2004006008001,000
2020 2021 2022Shareholders' Equity(GHS’M) Profit Before Tax (GHS’M)
  
GCB Bank’s Total Shareholders’ Equity dropped from 
GHS 2.7 billion to GHS 2.0 billion in 2022, primarily due to the signiﬁcant impairment loss on investment securities.  
We are relentless in the pursuit of our ambition to 
dominate the market and are conﬁdent that we will navigate well the challenges that confront us and emerge a stronger, resilient and customer focused bank. 
There is no doubt the recovery of the Ghanaian economy 
has signiﬁcant upside for GCB Bank. As a leading Bank we are well positioned to beneﬁt from Ghana’s future economic prospects leveraging our core strengths. In order to increase our chances of success it’s important to restore our capital strength and intensify e/uniFB00orts on accelerating sustainable proﬁtable growth so as to increase returns for shareholders.
Turnaround Plan in Response to the DDEP
As part of measures to address the impact of the DDEP on the bank, management developed a robust and comprehensive capital plan. A component of the capital plan is to rebuild our capital through a combination of raising additional equity capital, internal capital generation through retention of proﬁts and revaluation of landed property.
In line with our capital plan we seek to raise additional 
equity capital of GHS 1.0 billion by way of Common Equity Tier 1 capital of GHS 750 million and Additional Tier 1 capital of GH 250 million preference shares.  The objective of the capital raise is to meet regulatory capital adequacy ratio requirement, enhance our deal-making capacity and take advantage of opportunities available to the Bank while preserving our core strengths. Managing Director’s Review of Operations 
and Performance (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
34Furthermore, the improved capital position will 
strengthen our access to funding markets, bolster conﬁdence in the Bank, support targeted and prioritized investment in digital transformation and ultimately help to drive our business strategy. 
Our industry dynamics require that we grow our 
revenues, continually review our risk management framework, reduce and e/uniFB00ectively manage our costs and accelerate our digital transformation agenda. 
Growing our revenue especially from non-funded 
sources will continue to be a key focus area. We aim to further grow our retail banking franchise. Our retail franchise is a core strength and has signiﬁcant potential for further growth. We have the largest retail franchise in the banking sector and our client base continue to grow. Currently we serve over 2.0 million customers using our 186-branch network across the country complemented by our digital solutions. Our retail business has helped grow our stable deposit book enabling us to achieve lower cost of funds and build resilience in our balance sheet. 
The restructuring of our Wholesale and Investment 
banking business continues to yield signiﬁcant beneﬁts for the Bank. Growth in our client numbers beneﬁtted from stronger internal collaboration. We have strengthened our trade and transaction banking capabilities, reinforced pricing discipline and improved relationship management expertise through training and coaching. Going forward, we will continue to invest in appropriate technology platforms that will improve the client experience and operational e/uniFB03ciency.
Overall, through strategic partnerships we have been 
able to create and diversify our revenue streams especially in the area of non-funded income. We will continue to o/uniFB00er more and relevant innovative o/uniFB00erings and tailor our products to suit customer needs, intensify cross selling and marketing activities to drive growth of the business. 
The DDEP has raised the need to review our risk 
management framework and in particular reset our risk appetite and allocate capital to proﬁtable businesses in a manner that balances risk and return.  We will continually evaluate risk in our portfolio and in our operations and proactively implement relevant measures to appropriately address them. 
Further, our business continuity and cyber security 
management program will continue to beneﬁt from purposeful investments. Managing our cost base to ensure value for money has been a critical element of our strategy. While we recognise that we have made good progress in our cost management program we also acknowledge that there are areas where we can optimise processes, improve productivity to achieve cost savings and generate better value from our spending. We will continue with our prioritised and targeted approach to investments and strengthen project governance to reduce and keep cost under control. 
The rapid pace of digitisation and disruption within our 
industry as well as the growing number of FinTech’s continue to be a challenge and a threat. The strict and disciplined execution of our digital transformation strategy will be a key focus area going forward.  We will enhance our revenue generation capacity by driving new and innovative digital solutions, implement measures to drive adoption of new products, optimise and automate key processes to deliver e/uniFB03cient and cost-e/uniFB00ective back o/uniFB03ce operations with the view to drive best-in-class services to our cherished clients. 
Corporate Social Responsibility  
At GCB Bank, we have consistently demonstrated our commitment to the social responsibilities of the communities in which we operate, with a strong emphasis on health, education, sports, ﬁnancial inclusion, and environmental initiatives. In the past year, we devoted resources towards various impactful projects and sponsorships spanning various sectors. Noteworthy among these are:
• Construction of classroom block for Nalerigu Junior 
High School.
• Support for the construction of an O/uniFB03ce unit for the Ghana Prisons Service.
• Donation to Appiatse Support Fund to help in rebuilding the Appiatse community.
• Donation to Bagre Dam Relief fund.
• Sponsorship of the 2022 Ghana Economic Forum. 
Through these initiatives and sponsorships, we strive to 
positively impact society, uplift communities, and foster sustainable development.
Platinum Anniversary
This year marks our 70th anniversary. The year-long celebration started with a Christian thanksgiving service at the forecourt of our Head O/uniFB03ce and Muslim prayers at the national mosque. Other activities planned for the Managing Director’s 
Review of Operations and Performance 
(Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
35celebrations include various client and sta/uniFB00 engagement 
activities and corporate social responsibility activities.  
We are proud of our numerous achievements in 
supporting the Ghanaian economy and helping corporates, organisations, SMEs and individuals meet their ﬁnancial goals and banking needs. We are excited about our past and to our cherished clients we assure you of our continued support both in good and bad times. GCB Bank will continue to be “Your Bank for Life.”
As we celebrate this milestone which fell on May 20th, 
2023, it is imperative to acknowledge and express gratitude to our founding fathers and all those who have contributed to the Bank’s growth over the past seven decades. We commend the vision, dedication, and sacriﬁces of our past and current shareholders, previous managing directors and Board of Directors for their role and contribution in shaping the future of this invaluable national asset. To each and every one, we say Ayekooo! The commitment and dedication of each of you have propelled GCB Bank to its position as the foremost and largest indigenous Bank, spearheading Ghana’s socioeconomic development. 
In any organisation, sta/uniFB00 form the bedrock of success. To 
our esteemed colleagues, both past and present, we appreciate your incredible contributions. Your unwavering dedication and support have been pivotal to our 70 years of achievements. We thank you for your commitment, loyalty and resilience in service to our clients. The consistent, strong and resilient performance we have achieved over the years is testament to your capabilities and hard work. 
As we look forward to the years ahead it is crucial that 
we continuously adapt and remain relevant by anticipating and understanding our clients’ needs and proactively o/uniFB00er innovative and best-in-class solutions that exceeds their expectations. We will leverage our large and growing client base as well as strategic partnerships and play a key role in connecting businesses, organisations and individuals. Our steadfast focus on deeply understanding our customer needs, continued investment in digitisation and data and analytics will form the foundation for our continued delivery of exceptional customer experience.  Conclusion
Undoubtedly, the current economic challenges have a/uniFB00ected our stakeholders in various ways. For our customers we assure you of our continued support and to our shareholders we will always act in your best interest. Our Board has been a tremendous source of wisdom guiding us along the way and sharing their insights and expertise. 
I wish to reiterate that our ambition to dominate the 
market remains. 
We have a clear plan and a highly committed and resilient 
management team and sta/uniFB00 to deliver increased value for our shareholders. 
I am conﬁdent that with your support we will overcome 
this season of di/uniFB03cult and challenging economic conditions and rebound a much stronger Bank that is well positioned to take advantage of the opportunities in the economic prospects and success of our country and deliver increased value to our stakeholders. 
On behalf of management, I would like to thank our 
Shareholders, Board of Directors, customers, management, sta/uniFB00, and all other stakeholders for your support and commitment to GCB Bank PLC. We look forward to another 70 years of progress and prosperity and I wish you all a happy anniversary. 
Koﬁ Adomakoh
Managing DirectorManaging Director’s Review of Operations 
and Performance (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
36
#DoYourThing
Visitthenearestbranchtoapply.GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
37#DoYourThing
2pena
*&%Foreign&XrrenF\
$FFoXnW
noZandoperatein
diıerentcurrenciesasabusinessoranindividual.
Visitthenearestbranchtoapply.GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
38Report of the 
Directors
The Directors are pleased to submit their report on the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements of GCB 
Bank PLC for the year ended 31 December 2022.
Directors’ Responsibility Statement
The Directors are responsible for the preparation of the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements that give a true and fair view of GCB Bank PLC, comprising the statements of ﬁnancial position at 31 December 2022, statements of proﬁt or loss and comprehensive income, statements of changes in equity and statements of cash ﬂows for the year ended and notes to the consolidated ﬁnancial statements, which include a summary of signiﬁcant accounting policies and other explanatory notes, in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930). In addition, the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the Report of the Directors.
The Directors are also responsible for such internal controls as they determine are necessary to enable the 
preparation of ﬁnancial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and for maintaining adequate accounting records and an e/uniFB00ective system of risk management.
The Directors have made an assessment of the ability of the Bank and its subsidiaries to continue as going 
concerns and have no reason to believe that the businesses will not be a going concern in the year ahead. 
The Auditor is responsible for reporting on whether the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements give a 
true and fair view in accordance with the applicable ﬁnancial reporting framework.
Principal Activities
The Bank has a universal banking license and is registered to carry on the business of retail banking, commercial banking, corporate banking and treasury activities. It also engages in investment banking and Fintech business through its subsidiaries. The nature of the Group’s business did not change during the year.
Shareholding Structure
Details of the Bank’s twenty largest shareholders are disclosed in Note 43a of the Annual Report.
The Bank’s shareholding structure at the end of the year was as follows:
Shareholder Percentage Holding
Social Security and National Insurance Trust (SSNIT) 29.89%
The Government of Ghana 21.36%
Institutions and Individuals 48.75%
Total 100.00%
Subsidiaries and Associates
GCB Capital Limited and G-Money Financial Service Limited, companies incorporated in Ghana to engage in 
investment banking and Fintech business respectively are wholly owned subsidiaries of the Bank.
The Bank holds 20% interest in Ghana International Bank PLC, a company incorporated in the United Kingdom 
to provide universal banking services.
The Bank holds indirect interest of 20%, 25% and 34% in Ghana Textiles Manufacturing Company, Accra 
Markets Limited and NCR Ghana Limited respectively through its subsidiaries.
Ghana Textiles Manufacturing Company is a company engaged in the production and processing of textile as 
well as warehousing.GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
39Report of the Directors (continued)
Accra Markets Limited is a company incorporated in Ghana whose principal business is the management of the 
Kaneshie Market Complex. NCR Ghana Limited is a leading technology and omni channel solutions company incorporated in Ghana.
Details of serving directors’ other engagements at the reporting date are disclosed below:
Directors Qualiﬁcation Other Engagements and Positions
Mr. Jude Koﬁ Arthur Fellow, The Chartered Institute of 
Bankers, Ghana
BSc. Administration, University of 
Ghana Business School, LegonPinnacle group - Non-Executive Director
Mr. John Koﬁ Adomakoh Executive MBA, University of 
Ghana, Legon
BSc. Agriculture, University of 
Ghana, LegonGCB Capital Ltd - Non-Executive Director
G-Money Financial Services Ltd- Non-
Executive Director
Ghana International Bank PLC- Non-
Executive Director
Ghana Stock Exchange- Non-Executive 
Director
Mr. Socrates Afram Fellow, Association of Chartered Certiﬁed Accountants-UK
MBA Finance, University of Ghana, 
Legon
Bachelor of Commerce, University 
of Cape Coast.GCB Capital Limited - Non-Executive Director
NCR Ghana Limited - Non-Executive 
Director
G-Money Financial Services Ltd- Non-
Executive Director
Mr. Emmanuel Odartey LampteyFellow, Association of Chartered Certiﬁed Accountants-UK
Bachelor of Commerce, University 
of Cape Coast
Advanced Management Program, 
Harvard Business SchoolGCB Capital Limited -Non-Executive Director
Vivo Ghana Limited - Non-Executive 
Director
G-Money Financial Services Ltd- Non-
Executive Director
Mr. Samuel Kwame Yedu AidooChartered Institute of Securities & Investment- Certiﬁcate in Investment FSA Financial Regulation Securities and Derivatives - London (Nov 2010)
ACI - Certiﬁcate in FX Options 
(Nov 2006) South Africa 
MSc. International Securities, 
Investment Banking (June 2003) 
ICMA Centre, Henley Business 
School.
University of Reading
BSC Natural Resources 
Management (June 2001) KNUSTGCB Capital Limited - Non-Executive Director
G-Money Financial Services Ltd- Non-
Executive DirectorGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
40Directors Qualiﬁcation Other Engagements and Positions
Mrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah MPhil- Ghana Institute of 
Management & Public 
Administration (GIMPA)
BA English & Literature, University 
of Ghana, LegonNone
Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III Bachelor of Commerce, University 
of Cape Coast
Diploma Business Studies, 
Takoradi PolytechnicNasaa Company Limited - Executive Director
Government Special Initiative - Non-
Executive Director
Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah Fellow, Chartered Institute of 
Management Accountants (CIMA) UK
Fellow British Society of 
Commerce 
Member Institute of Chartered 
Accountants Ghana 
Post Graduate Diploma Strategic 
Financial Management, Kingston UniversityDeputy CEO – Finance and Administration - COCOBOD
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba Member, The Chartered Institute 
of Bankers, Ghana
Member, Institute of Chartered 
Accountants Ghana 
Member, Chartered Institute of 
Procurement and Supply 
M.A. Economic Policy 
Management, University of Ghana Legon
Bachelor of Commerce, University 
of Cape Coast 
Diploma in Education, University 
of Cape Coast.Northern Electricity Distribution Company (NEDCo Ltd) - Executive Director
Finag Company LimitedReport of the 
Directors (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
41Directors Qualiﬁcation Other Engagements and Positions
Mr. Francis Arthur Collins Fellow - Ghana Institute of 
Information Technology
Member - BCS Chartered Institute 
for Information Technology, United Kingdom
Member - Institute for the 
Management of Information Systems, United Kingdom; Member - British Computer Society, United Kingdom
Member - Institute of Data 
Processing Management, United Kingdom
Master’s Degree in Information 
Technology and Business Administration from the University of Leicester, United Kingdom
DP in Data Processing from the 
University of Science and Technology, Kumasi-Ghana
Proﬁciency Certiﬁcate in Systems 
Analysis and Design from The National Computing Centre, Manchester - Awarded by the British Computer Society Information Systems Examination Board (ISEB) of the United Kingdom.None
Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu MBA Finance, University of Ghana, 
Legon
Certiﬁcate from the Financial 
Institution Analysis School of the Federal Reserve Bank, Washington DC
B.Sc. Administration, Banking & 
Finance, University of Ghana, LegonNone
Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah AsiriﬁGhana School of Law
Master in Public Administration 
(MPA), University of Ghana, Legon
B.Sc. Administration, Public 
Administration, University of Ghana, LegonLegal Service BoardReport of the Directors (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
42Directors Qualiﬁcation Other Engagements and Positions
Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah PHD. in Actuarial Science – KNUST
Msc (Finance) – University of 
Derby (UK)
BSc. Computer Science - KNUSTZintex Portfolio- Executive DirectorBoard Member - Ghana Cocoa Board The Lands and Natural Resources 
Committee in Parliament
Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry, 
Ghana
Financial Results
The ﬁnancial results of the Bank and Group for the year ended are set out in the ﬁnancial statements, highlights 
of which are as follows:
2022 2021
/uni00A0Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
(Loss)/Proﬁt for the year (attributable to equity holders) (555,798)  (593,398) 556,666 572,281 
to which is added the balance brought forward on 
retained earnings of 1,434,337 1,547,835 1,013,504 1,111,387 
878,539 954,437 1,570,170 1,683,668 
Out of which is transferred to the statutory reserve fund of -  - (69,583) (69,583)
Dividend declared and paid of  (132,500)  (132,500) (66,250) (66,250)
(132,500) (132,500) (135,833) (135,833)
leaving a balance to be carried forward on retained earnings of746,039 821,937 1,434,337 1,547,835 
According to section 34 (1) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) a bank 
or specialised deposit-taking institution shall establish and maintain a Reserve Fund into which shall be transferred out of net proﬁts for each year. The bank made a loss in the reporting year and therefore no amount was transferred from retained earnings to statutory reserve. 
Related Party Transactions
The Board ensures that transactions with related parties including internal group transactions are reviewed to assess its risk and are subject to appropriate restrictions by requiring that such transactions be conducted on non-preferential terms. 
Information regarding Directors’ interests in ordinary shares of the Bank and remuneration is disclosed in Note 
38 to the ﬁnancial statements. Other than service contracts, no Director had a material interest in any contract to which any Group company was a party during the year. Related party transactions and balances are also disclosed in Note 38 to the ﬁnancial statements.Report of the 
Directors (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
43Biographical Information of Directors
No. Name Profession Nationality Born 
1. Mr. Jude Koﬁ Arthur Banker Ghanaian 1955
2. Mr. Koﬁ Adomakoh Banker Ghanaian 1966
3. Mr. Socrates Afram Banker / Chartered Accountant Ghanaian 1973
4. Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey Banker / Chartered Accountant Ghanaian 1974
5. Mr. Emmanuel Kwame Yedu Aidoo Banker Ghanaian 1975
6. Mrs. Lydia Gyamera Essah Banker / Management & Banking Consultant Ghanaian 1955
7. Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III Business Executive / Traditional Ruler Ghanaian 1970
8. Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba Chartered Accountant/ Banker Ghanaian 1971
9. Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins Information Technologist Ghanaian 1956
10. Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah Chartered Accountant Ghanaian 1962
11. Alhaji Yakubu Adam Alhassan Banker / Business Executive Ghanaian 1966
12. Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asiriﬁ Lawyer Ghanaian 1963
13. Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah Financial & Investment Consultant Ghanaian 1970
The Directors are responsible for the long-term success of the Group, determining the strategic direction of the 
Group and reviewing operating, ﬁnancial and risk exposures of the Group. There is a formal schedule of matters reserved for the Board of Directors, including approval of the Group’s annual business plan, the Group’s strategy, acquisitions, disposals and capital expenditure projects above certain thresholds, all guarantees, treasury policies, the ﬁnancial statements, the Group’s dividend policy, transactions involving the issue or purchase of the Group’s shares, borrowing powers, appointments to the Board, alterations to the regulations, legal actions brought by or against the Group and the scope of delegation to Board committees, subsidiaries boards and management committees. Responsibility for the development of policy and strategy and operational management is delegated to the Executive Directors and a management committee, which as at the date of this report includes four (4) executive Directors and ﬁfteen (15) senior managers. 
Particulars of entries in the Interests Register during the ﬁnancial year
No Director had any interest in contracts and proposed contracts with the Group during the year under review, hence there were no entries recorded in the Interests Register as required by 194(6), 195(1)(a) and 196 of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992).
Internal Control System
The Directors have overall responsibility for the Group’s internal control systems and annually review its e/uniFB00ectiveness, including a review of ﬁnancial, operational, compliance and risk management controls. The implementation and maintenance of the risk management and internal control systems are the responsibility of the Executive Directors and other senior management. The systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and to provide reasonable, but not absolute, assurance against material misstatement or loss. The Directors have reviewed the e/uniFB00ectiveness of the internal control systems, including controls related to ﬁnancial, operational and reputational risks identiﬁed by the Group as at the reporting date and found no signiﬁcant failings or weaknesses during this review. Report of the Directors (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
44Corporate Social Responsibility
Corporate social responsibility activities performed during the year have been disclosed in the note 42 of the 
ﬁnancial statements.
Auditor
The auditor, Deloitte and Touche Ghana, has expressed willingness to continue in o/uniFB03ce in accordance with Section 139(5) of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992).
Auditor’s fees
Included in other expenses (Note 16) for the year is the agreed auditor’s remuneration of GHS 1,800,000 (2021: GHS 1,610,000). 
Government of Ghana Domestic Debt Exchange (DDE)
On 5 December 2022, the Government of Ghana launched the Ghana’s Domestic Debt Exchange programme.  This was an invitation for the voluntary exchange of about GHS130 billion of the domestic bonds of the Republic, including E.S.L.A. and Daakye bonds, for a package of New Bonds to be issued by the Republic. 
This was part of a comprehensive programme that aimed at bringing the public debt stock back on a sustainable 
path as part of a requirement to allow Ghana’s economy to recover from its economic crisis and unlock ﬁnancial assistance from the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Under the exchange programme, eligible bond holders were put into three categories as follows:
• Category A: These includes collective Investment Schemes (CIS) and natural persons less than 59 years old 
as at 31st January 2023.
• Category B: Eligible Holders that are natural persons 59 years old or older as of 31st January 2023.
• Category C: Eligible holders that are not Category A or B. This includes corporate entities and ﬁnancial institutions not deﬁned as CIS.
The Group falls under Category C. 
The key areas of the memorandum that relates to Category C Eligible Bond Holders were:
• The General Category C holders will receive new bonds for securities which are due in 2023 and later than 
2023.
• Interest on the new bonds will be paid in Cash and in kind. The Payment in Kind (PIK) would be accrued and capitalized up to 21st February 2025 after which Interest payment would be fully cash.
• GOG will not make principal payments in cash on the Eligible Bonds maturing prior to the Settlement Date.
Operational & ﬁnancial impact on the Group
The bank tendered a total amount of GHS 6.784 billion being the value of Eligible Bonds plus accrued interest for a set of New Bonds under the exchange.
The exchange was occasioned by the Obligor being ﬁnancially challenged, hence the new Bonds were considered 
originated credit impaired. IFRS 9 requires that the new bonds be placed in stage three and assessed for impairment. The impairment assessment for the eligible bonds was done by discounting the cashﬂows under the New Bond using an appropriate discount factor and comparing same with the carrying amount of the Old Bonds before the exchange. 
In addition, Treasury Bills and Bonds that were issued by the government but not subject to the debt exchange 
were also assessed for impairment. Report of the 
Directors (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
45The disclosure of Impairment on Government Securities can be found on note 6.
This resulted in the total impairment loss of GHS 1.814 billion to the Bank and GHS 1.831 billion to the Group. 
This had a signiﬁcant impact on the performance of the Bank for the year ended 31 December 2022.
The debt exchange had signiﬁcant impact on the Group considering the sizable amount of portfolio it has in 
Government of Ghana securities. The key areas of impact are liquidity, proﬁtability, and capital. Management of the Group has assessed the impact on the Group’s operations and concluded on this under the going concern assessment.
Going Concern assessment
The Directors have reviewed the Group and Bank’s budgets and cash ﬂow forecasts and considered the Group and Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern in the light of current and anticipated economic conditions. 
These budgets and cash ﬂow forecasts considered the impact of the Government Domestic Debt Exchange 
Programme, including projections of the impact on the Group’s capital, funding, and liquidity requirements.
As part of this assessment, the Directors considered the su/uniFB03ciency of the Group’s ﬁnancial resources now and 
post-debt exchange. The management of the Group’s ﬁnancial resources, which it deﬁnes as capital, funding and liquidity, and risk capacity, is a critical enabler of the achievement of the Group’s stated growth and return targets and is driven by the Group’s overall risk appetite. Forecast growth in earnings and balance sheet risk weighted assets (RWA) is based on the Group’s macroeconomic outlook and is evaluated against available ﬁnancial resources, considering the requirements of capital providers, regulators, and rating agencies. The expected outcomes and constraints are then stress tested, and the Group set targets through di/uniFB00erent business cycles and scenarios. 
Regulatory Reliefs
The Regulator, Bank of Ghana (BoG) has granted some reliefs to banks for purposes of determining Minimum Regulatory Capital. The key regulatory reliefs for the determination of capital were:
1. Reduction of Capital Conservation Bu/uniFB00er from 3% to zero, e/uniFB00ectively reducing the minimum Capital 
Adequacy Ratio (CAR) from 13% to 10%.
2. Derecognition losses (ECL) emanating from the Debt Exchange shall be spread equally over a period of four 
(4) years for the purposes of CAR computation.
3. Banks have a maximum of four (4) years to restore the minimum paid-up capital as a result of any capital 
shortfall arising solely from the derecognition losses
4. Increase in Tier II component of regulatory capital from 2% to 3% of Total Risk Weighted Assets (RWA)
5. Reduction of minimum Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital from 6.5% to 5.5% of RWA
6. Increase in allowable portion of property revaluation gains for Tier II capital computation from 50% to 60%
7. Risk-weights attached to New Bonds to be set at 0% for CAR computation, and at 100% for Old Bonds
8. Derecognition losses arising from the Debt Exchange shall be spread equally over a period of four (4) years 
for the purposes of Net Own Funds computation.
Conclusion on going concern assessment
The Bank has conducted stress tests by incorporating the regulatory forbearances to determine the impact on 
capital and for that matter going concern. The outcome is that the Bank’s Capital is above the regulatory minimum requirement.Report of the Directors (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
46Based on the above, the directors are satisﬁed that the Group and Bank have resources to continue in business 
for the foreseeable future.  
The directors have, at the time of approving the ﬁnancial statements, a reasonable expectation that the Group 
and Bank have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future. Thus, they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the ﬁnancial statements.
The Directors conﬁrm that to the best of their knowledge:
• the ﬁnancial statements, prepared in accordance with applicable laws and the International Financial Reporting Standards, give a true and fair view of the Group and Bank’s ﬁnancial position, performance and cash ﬂows; and
• the state of the Group and Bank’s a/uniFB00airs is satisfactory.
Approval of consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements
The report of directors and consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements set out on pages 72 to 173, which have been prepared on the going concern basis, were approved by the Board of Directors on 18th April, 2023  
and signed on its behalf by:
 
Mr. Jude Koﬁ Arthur
ChairmanMr. Koﬁ AdomakohManaging DirectorReport of the 
Directors (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
47Dear Shareholders, 
GCB Bank PLC is committed to continuously improving our corporate governance practices and ensuring that 
they align with our business and stakeholders needs. This statement describes the Bank’s approach to corporate governance and best narrates the governance practices in place. GCB strives to conduct business in a more accountable manner by putting in place policies and procedures that shape our strong culture and integrity, guide how we take decisions and how risk is mitigated. Good Corporate Governance Principles also support the Bank’s purpose, vision and values. 
The Board has adopted a Board Corporate Governance Framework (CGF) that sets out the mandate, 
responsibilities and procedures of the Board and the Board Committees, including matters reserved for the Board’s decision. The CGF is in accordance with international Corporate Governance principles, laws of Ghana such as Company Act 2019 (Act 992), the Bank & Specialized Deposit Taking Institutions Act 2016, (Act 930). 
This Corporate Governance Statement is in accordance with the Bank of Ghana’s Corporate Governance Directive 
2018, Fit and Proper Person Directive 2019, Security and Exchange Commission Corporate Governance Code 2020, Ghana Stock Exchange Listing Rules and Regulations and Mandatory Disclosure Items for Public Companies in Ghana from Securities and Exchange Commission.  
The CGF is reviewed by the Board as and when necessary, in line with evolving corporate governance 
requirements and practices to ensure its continued relevance to the Board and to meet stakeholder expectations and the dynamic environment in which the Group operates. For shareholders, and other stakeholders’ value, the Bank is committed to fulﬁlling its Corporate Governance obligations and responsibilities in the best interest of the Bank. 
It is our responsibility to guarantee that good corporate governance and its associated standards are rooted in 
the ideas and business practices driven by the Board.  
The Board Governance Structure
Shareholders
The Board
Audit 
CommitteeRisk 
CommitteeHR & Remuneration CommitteeCredit 
CommitteeIT/ 
Digitalization & Procurement CommitteeG-Money and Electronic Payment Committee
Managing Director
Reporting to the Board and executing delegated powers
Executive CommitteeCorporate Governance 
ReportGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
48The Board is the highest decision-making body of the Bank and provides strategic direction and guidance for 
our business and represents the interests of our shareholders through the creation of sustainable value. The Board is responsible for setting the strategic objectives and risk appetite of the Bank and set the Board’s expectations for the Bank’s values and desired culture. The Board continues to focus on our customers, our people, the communities and environment in which we operate and in doing so enhances long-term shareholder returns and stakeholder value.  
A robust Board Charter referred to as the Board Corporate Governance Framework is in place and compliant 
with Regulator’s Corporate Governance Directives (Security and Exchange Commission Corporate Governance Code 2020 and Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive 2018) and internationally accepted best practices to guide the way the Bank is governed. The Board Corporate Governance Framework outlines the roles and responsibilities of the Board.  
The Board ensures that the Bank’s governance processes align with regulators’ directives and framework. The 
Board aligns strategies with goals embedded with high level of ethics and integrity, deﬁning roles and responsibilities, and managing risk e/uniFB00ectively.  
Roles and Responsibilities 
The Board being central in corporate governance and the highest decision-making body have the following responsibilities, which include but not limited to: 
 –Exercises entrepreneurial leadership, integrity and judgment in the oversight and control of Management
 –Ensures that the Board and its Committees act in the best interest of the Bank at all times
 –Considers and approves the long term and short-term strategies of the Bank and monitors its implementation by Management
 –Ensures the integrity of Annual Reports and Accounts provided to regulators and other stakeholders
 –Oversees Risk Management and Internal Audit Functions of the Bank
 –Ensures the development of Succession and Leadership Pipeline and remuneration structure for Board and Senior Management
 –Ensures that Management systems are put in place to identify and manage environmental and social risk and their impact.
The Board guides the strategic direction of the Bank and represents the interests of our shareholders by overseeing activities that create sustainable value. The roles and responsibilities of the Board, including the matters that are speciﬁcally reserved for the Board and those delegated to Management, are set out in the Board Corporate Governance Framework among others. 
The Board approves the risk appetite, strategic & business plans and other initiatives which are likely to have 
material e/uniFB00ect on the Bank’s risk proﬁle. Furthermore, the board oversees the implementation of the Bank’s Corporate Governance framework and Internal Control Framework, and reviews from time to time whether these remain appropriate in view of material changes to the size, nature and complexity of the Bank’s operations.
In addition, the Board oversees the selection, performance, remuneration and succession plans of the Managing 
Director (MD), Executive Management, Functional Heads and other members of Senior Management, such that the Board is satisﬁed with the collective competence of senior management to e/uniFB00ectively lead the operations of the Bank.  Corporate Governance 
Report (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
49Separation of the Chairman and Managing Director Roles 
a. The Board Chairman, Mr. Jude Koﬁ Arthur is an Independent Non-Executive Director. 
 The Chairman’s role includes but not limited to the following: 
• Promotes open and inclusive deliberations and debate by the Board; 
• Maintains a regular, open and constructive dialogue with the Managing Director and Management, 
serving as the primary link between the Board and Management; 
• Represents the views of the Board and the Bank to stakeholders, including shareholders, regulators and the community; 
• Liaises with the Company Secretary in relation to the Board’s information requirements to assist the Board with e/uniFB00ective decision-making; 
• Sets the Board agenda together with the Managing Director and the Company Secretary, ensuring that reasonable time and attention is dedicated to matters within the responsibilities of the Board.  
b. The Managing Director, Mr. John Koﬁ Adomakoh  is an Executive Director on the Board of GCB Bank PLC, 
the Chairman of Executive Committee (EXCO) and the Board Chairman of GCB Capital Ltd (GCL). He has delegated duties with authority from, and accountable to the Board for the development and successful implementation of the Bank’s strategy. His role among others include but not limited to the following: 
• He is the leader of the Executive Committee who enforces the Bank’s code of conduct, culture and values;
• Implements the Bank’s strategy, business and ﬁnancial objectives and/or plan, exercising powers delegated by the Board as appropriate;
• Evaluates the impact of resource or capital allocation, approving expenditure or making ﬁnancial decisions on strategic objectives and ﬁnancial position;
• Implements processes, policies and systems together with appropriate controls to e/uniFB00ectively manage the operations and risk of the Bank;
• Ensures the timely preparation, presentation, adequacy and integrity of information provided to the Board, to enable the Board to carry out its responsibilities; 
• Responsible for external engagement with stakeholders, including shareholders, government, regulators and the community.
The separation of authority is set out in writing and agreed by the Board in the Corporate Governance Framework. This enhances independent oversight of Executive Management by the Board and helps to ensure that no one individual on the Board has autonomous power, inﬂuence or authority. 
Board and Management Roles 
Recently, Boards have been given additional oversight responsibilities, notably in recovery and resolution planning, capital & liquidity planning, stress testing, model validation and new product/initiative approval as well as risk culture. As Boards are expected to engage more actively in a broad range of issues, they remain conscious of their responsibilities in comparison to Management. 
Board Composition 
The Board is made up of thirteen (13) Directors, with nine (9) Non-Executive Directors out of which 30% are Independent Directors in-line with the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive 2018.  
With the nine (9) Non-Executive Directors and four (4) Executive Directors, there are clearly deﬁned roles 
within our Board structure for the category of Directors as documented in the Board Corporate Governance Corporate Governance Report (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
50Framework. The Board has a rich blend of skills and knowledge, combined with the extensive experience 
required to guide our business in Governance, Banking and Finance, Accountancy, Law, Information Technology, Marketing, Entrepreneurship and Management. A skills matrix for the Board has been tabled under Executives / non-executives directors of the same page.
New Appointments
During 2022 ﬁnancial year, two (2) Non-Executive Directors (Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asiriﬁ and Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah) and one (1) Executive Director (Mr. Sam Kwame Yedu Aidoo) were appointed onto the Board. These Directors were inducted into o/uniFB03ce on 22 February 2022. An induction training and comprehensive induction pack prepared by the Secretariat was o/uniFB00ered to them for guidance. The Board Succession Plan involves the guiding principles for e/uniFB00ective succession planning as well as the procedures in ensuring a smooth transition in the Board’s succession process as existing Directors leave the Board and new ones come on board. 
In line with Securities, and Exchange Governance Code and best practice, the Board nominated Mrs. Lydia Essah 
as the Director in charge of relations with Minority Shareholders.
Executive/Non-Executive Directors 
The Board comprises individuals of high calibre with diverse experience, which collectively has the necessary skills, experience and qualiﬁcations to e/uniFB00ectively manage the Bank and to discharge the responsibilities of the Board. The diversity of the background of the Directors ensures good use of their di/uniFB00erent and wide-ranging skills. 
The table below highlights the skills matrix and proﬁle of Directors:
No. Name Profession Status Born  Appointment date 
1. Mr. Jude Koﬁ Arthur Banker/Consultant Non-Executive 
Director 1955 06/04/2017 
2. Mr. John Koﬁ Adomakoh Banker Executive Director 1966 15/11/2020
3. Mr. Socrates Afram Banker/Chartered Accountant Executive Director 1973 24/03/2016 
4. Mr. Emmanuel Odartey Lamptey Banker/Chartered Accountant Executive Director  1974 20/01/2021 
5. Mr. Samuel Kwame Yedu AidooBanker Executive Director 1975 24/02/2022
6. Mrs. Lydia Essah Banker/Management & Banking Consultant Non-Executive Director    1955 06/04/2017 
7. Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III Business Executive/ 
Traditional Ruler Non-Executive Director   1970 07/06/2017 
8. Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba Chartered Accountant Non-Executive Director 1971 25/10/2017 
9. Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins Information Technologist Non-Executive Director 1956 25/10/2017 
10. Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah Chartered Accountant Non-Executive Director 1962 25/10/2017 Corporate Governance 
Report (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
51No. Name Profession Status Born  Appointment date 
11. Alhaji Alhassan Adam Yakubu Banker/ Business 
Executive Non-Executive 
Director   1966 12/07/2018 
12.  Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asiriﬁ Esq. Lawyer Non-Executive Director  1963  24/02/2022
13. Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah Member of Parliament/ 
Accountant Non-Executive Director  1970  24/02/2022
Independence of Board of Directors 
All directors are expected to bring independent and unfettered judgment to the Board’s deliberations.  
The larger number of Non-Executive Directors on the Board makes the Board more independent and allows it 
to provide higher level of Corporate Governance to shareholders. It also satisﬁes our criteria for independence, which align with the guidance and recommendation provided in the Corporate Governance Framework.  
Each Non-Executive Director must disclose all interests that may a/uniFB00ect the exercise of their unfettered and 
independent judgment as a Director prior to their appointment or election and promptly as and when circumstances change would have to make disclosures that extends to include relevant Interests of associates such as close family members and family companies. The Board considers information about any such interests or relationships, including any related ﬁnancial or other details when assessing Director’s independence.
The Board considers a strong constituent of independence among its members, which depicts good corporate 
governance. Independent Directors of the Bank exercise independent judgment and participated in the deliberations of the Board objectively with no single person or small group of individuals dominating the Board’s decision-making process.
E/uniFB00ectiveness of the Board 
The Board is structured to ensure that the Directors provide GCB Bank PLC with the appropriate balance of skills, experience and knowledge as well as independence. Given the nature of GCB Bank’s business experience of banking and ﬁnancial services it is clearly of beneﬁt, that the Bank has a number of Directors with the right skill and experience mix. The Board also derives some beneﬁts from Directors with experience in other ﬁelds. 
The GCB Board is an e/uniFB00ective one that embodies the following characteristics:
• Have experience and knowledgeable members who have the relevant industry and market knowledge to 
impact the organization’s activities.
• Are held accountable by shareholders for its actions by paying close attention to meeting attendance, Board elections and standards and time commitment.
• Put in place a mechanism to evaluate its performance regularly and act on recommendations.
• Ensures that Management and the Board Remuneration are in line with the organization and shareholders’ long-term interest and are su/uniFB03cient to attract the right caliber of Executive Directors.
• Separation of Powers with the Chairman heading the Board and the Managing Director heading Management.
• Have diverse tenure cycle to provide room for the gradual refreshment of Board Members.
• A diverse Board in terms of gender, age, ethnicity and religion leading to a diversiﬁed thought process in the Boardroom with constructive discussions and decision-making.Corporate Governance Report (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
52Board Committees 
The Board, in 2022, reconstituted the membership of its six (6) Committees to oversee the implementation of 
strategies and policies and maintaining e/uniFB00ective governance in the following areas: business decisions; audit; risk and compliance; remuneration, Board composition; succession planning and corporate governance. Membership of the Committees is reviewed on an annual basis or as and when the need arises. 
To ensure e/uniFB00ective oversight leadership, the Board receives the minutes/reports of all Committee meetings at 
Board meetings for ratiﬁcation and approval.  
All the Committees have written terms of reference that are reviewed annually and mapped to applicable 
legislation, regulation and governance practices to ensure relevance and compliance to reﬂect changes in the industry.
The Committees’ membership and functions are as follows: 
Audit Committee 
The Audit Committee was chaired by Mr. Emmanuel Ray Ankrah (an Independent Non-Executive Director) and 
other members included Mr. Osmani Ayuba, Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu and Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah. 
The functions of the Committee among others include the following: 
• Overseeing the Internal Audit Co-sourcing arrangement;
• Reviewing the expertise, resources and experience of the Bank’s ﬁnance function; 
• Monitoring and reviewing the integrity of the ﬁnancial statements of the Bank including its monthly, 
quarterly, bi-annual and annual reports, trading statements and any other formal announcement relating to its ﬁnancial performance, and reviewing any signiﬁcant ﬁnancial reporting issues and/or judgments contained therein; 
• Recommending the appointment of the External Auditor and to oversee the external process; 
• Approving Internal Audit plans, monitoring & reviewing the e/uniFB00ectiveness of the Bank’s internal controls and internal audit function;  
• Operating as an overseer and a maker of recommendations to the Board for its consideration and ﬁnal approval; and
• Recommending the appointment of a Chief Internal Auditor. 
Below are areas that were considered by the Committee in 2022:
a. 2022 Unaudited Financial Statement 
b. Internal Audit Report for 2022       
c. Status of Action taken by the Bank on 2021 Management Letter 
d. 2022 Accounts as compared to the 2021 Budget
e. Outlook for 2022 & Strategies to Plough back missed proﬁt with Focus on Tax Planning, Expense Rationalization 
& Tax Capital Allowance Acceleration    
f. Internal Audit Presentations- Audit Activities for 2022
g. Internal Control & Operational Resilience Assessment
h. Update on 2022 Financial Statement Audit: 
• Signiﬁcant Risk Status
• IFRS 9 Model Validation Status
• Fraud Risk ConsiderationCorporate Governance 
Report (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
53• Loan Book Review 
• Tax Audit Status  
i. Internal Audit Presentation
• 2022 Audit Plan & Thematic Issues
• Internal Audit Plan
Risk Committee 
The Risk Committee was chaired by Mrs. Lydia Essah (an Independent Non-Executive Director). The other 
members were Mr. Ray Ankrah, Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu and Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah. 
The Committee’s role is to assist and advise the Board in the governance and e/uniFB00ective management of the 
Bank’s risk portfolio. 
The risk functions of the Committee among others include the following: 
• Establishing, reviewing, and recommending to the Board the Bank’s overall Risk Appetite as well as assessing 
the appropriateness of the strategy in the context of the Risk Appetite, taking account of the current and prospective macroeconomic and ﬁnancial environment. 
• Reviewing and recommending the Bank’s Risk Management Framework (i.e. policies, processes, models and limits) to manage and mitigate risk within the approved Strategy and Risk Appetite to the Board for approval. 
• Monitoring the Bank’s risk exposures through the; 
• Review of the Bank’s risk proﬁle 
• Review of management reports, monthly “key performance Indicators (KPIs), reports on any material breaches of risk limits, on the nature and extent of risk exposures of the Bank. 
The Cyber security functions of the Committee among others include the following: 
• Creating secure environment within “cyberspace” for the ﬁnancial service industry and generate adequate trust and conﬁdence in ICT systems as well as transactions in the cyberspace;  
• Creating assurance framework for design of security policies and for promotion of compliance to global security standards and best practices by way of cyber and information security assessment;  
• Improving the integrity of ICT products and services by establishing infrastructure for testing and validation of security of these products and services;  
• Promoting continuous cyber and information security risk assessment. 
• Promoting security awareness. 
• The establishment of a state-of-the-art Security Operation Centre (SOC) for the Bank. 
The following matters were considered by the Risk Committee in 2022:  
i. Risk Dashboard 
ii. ILAAP & ICAAP
iii. Status of Corporate Loans approved in 2022
iv. Status of BoG Risk Management Directive Implementation 
v. Risk Gap Closure proposal 
vi. Terms of Reference of the Risk Committee 
vii. Approved Policies on Risk Appetite Framework, Credit Risk, Collateral, Syndication, Market Risk, Liquidity 
Risk and Product Risk.Corporate Governance Report (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
54At the Cyber Security meetings, the following matters were considered:
i. Cyber Security Initiatives and Overall Security Maturity Posture of GCB Bank PLC 
ii. Update on Bank of Ghana’s Cyber Security Directives-Current Position of the Bank
iii. Review and Approval of the Bank’s Information Security Policies
Human Resource and Nominations Committee 
The Human Resource and Nominations Committee was chaired by Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III (a Non-Executive 
Director). The other members were Mrs. Lydia Essah, Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins and Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asiriﬁ. 
The functions of the Committee among others include the following: Establishing employment policies to support approved Human Resource strategy;  
• Overseeing the establishment of remuneration policies that promote the achievement of strategic objectives 
and encourage individual performance; 
• Considering risk to the Bank, which may arise from remuneration policies and practices that drive organization behaviours; 
• Regularly reviewing incentives scheme to ensure continued contribution to shareholders’ value;
• Developing strategies and policies for Board approval, in matters relating to recruitment, selection, training, motivation, development, reward and retention of sta/uniFB00;
• Regularly reviewing the structure, size and composition of the Board; 
• Giving full consideration to succession planning for Directors and other Senior Management; 
• Identifying and nominating for the approval of the Board, candidates to ﬁll Board/Key Management vacancies as and when they arise; 
• Evaluating the balance of skills, knowledge, experience and diversity on the Board prior to any appointment to the Board; 
• Reviewing the results of the evaluation of Board performance; 
• Keeping under review the leadership needs of the Bank, Executive and Non- Executive; 
• Evaluating the Chairpersons of the various Committees. 
The following matters were considered by the Committee in 2022:  
i. Petition for sta/uniFB00 on Disciplinary Cases 
ii. Update on Disciplinary Committee cases 
iii. HR Status Report
iv. Leadership Pipeline 
v. Corporate Social Responsibility Budget for 2022
vi. Review of Service Agreement for outsourced Companies
vii. Update on Sta/uniFB00 Retiring from January to December 2022
viii. Management Plan of Succession of the Retiree
ix. Update on Performance Management System 
x. Update on Job Evaluation
xi. Review of the Terms of ReferenceCorporate Governance 
Report (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
55Board Credit Committee 
The Board Credit Committee was chaired by Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu (a Non-Executive Director). The other 
members were Mrs. Lydia Essah, Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III and Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asiriﬁ. 
The functions of the Committee among others include the following:  
• Making recommendations for the Board’s approval in respect of credit requests made by customers;       
• Reviewing sector, single name, and product/asset class concentration exposure reports in order to manage 
large credit exposures, and escalate any breaches to the Board taking into account the relevant Bank of Ghana publications; 
• Reviewing at least annually, limits with respect to concentration risk, and make recommendations to the Board as necessary; 
• Reviewing and monitoring the large credit exposure reports received from Management, and ensure that exposures are maintained within Bank of Ghana and Board-approved limits; and
• Determining if additional Management action is required to manage or mitigate the large credit exposures risk and escalate issues to the Board where it is deemed appropriate to do so.     
The following matters were considered by the Committee in 2022:
Credit Reports on:i. Loan Recovery Updates
ii. Update on Legal Cases on Recovery
iii. Collateral Report (State of Perfection)
iv. Credit Concentration by Industry
v. Review of Credits granted by Management
vi. Large Exposures Reports (50 Largest)
vii. Non-Performing Loans Report
viii. Updates on status of approved credits
ix. Review of credit policies
IT/Digitalization and Procurement Committee 
The IT/Digitalization and Procurement Committee was chaired by Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins (an Independent 
Non-Executive Director). The role of this Committee was merged with meetings on Cyber Security issues.  The other members were Mrs. Lydia Essah, Mr. Osmani Ayuba and Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III.  
The functions of the Committee among others include the following: 
• Overseeing the development of GCB Bank’s Procurement Policy.
• Oversight and reviewing of tender process and appropriate probity processes to ensure the ethical 
procurement of goods and services to ensure compliance with the Procurement Policy;
• Ensuring strategic procurement objectives are developed and implemented through a procurement strategy to ensure that major investment decisions are procured strategically to enable prudent and e/uniFB03cient outcomes through market engagement; 
• Assessing the adequacy and e/uniFB00ectiveness of internal controls and risks as they relate to procurement activities; Corporate Governance Report (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
56• Reviewing and monitoring procurement performance assessment and processes to identify improvement 
opportunities for the future; 
• Reviewing, and approving IT strategic plans, oversee major initiatives, and allocate resources; 
• Establishing IT priorities for the Bank as a whole. 
The following matters were considered by the Committee in 2022:
i. IT Strategy 
ii. IT License Strategy
iii. Digital/Marketing Strategy
iv. IT Projects - 2022 (Project Status)
v. Capital Expenditure Management Framework
vi. Cloud Migration 
vii. Appraisal/Review of the Security Operations Centre 
viii. Update on the Bank’s ATM/POS Systems/Devices, App/USSD 
ix. Digital Roadmap – Appraisal/Review
x. Flexcube Upgrade - Managed Service/Training
xi. Technology Strategy - Strategic Imperatives
xii. Projects on Schedule (Cost/Timelines/Status)
xiii. Enterprise Risk Management (ERM)
xiv. Customer Relations Management System (CRM)
xv. Wide Area Network (WAN) - Back-up
xvi. Data Warehouse
xvii. Armoured Cash-In-Transit (CIT) Services
xviii.  Trade Solution (Front/Back End)
xix. Cash Counting Machines
xx. Capital Expenditure Management Framework (Development Guidelines)
xxi. GCB Platinum (70th) Anniversary Celebration April 2022 – December 2023
xxii. Review of Committee Terms of Reference 
G-Money and Electronic Payment Committee 
The G-Money and Electronic Payment Committee was chaired by Mr. Osmani Ayuba (an Independent Non-
Executive Director). The other members were Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins, Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III and Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asiriﬁ.
The functions of the Committee among others include the following: 
• Providing direction on matters relating to enhancement of G-Money and other electronic channels as well as 
e/uniFB03cient customer service in pursuit of delivering on the Bank’s digital transformation agenda which is customer centric; 
• Assisting Management in developing e/uniFB00ective strategies to stay ahead of the competition in the digital space; Corporate Governance 
Report (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
57• Reviewing report from Management on strategies to keep the Bank abreast with developments in the 
payment industry; 
• Ensuring and driving the development and maintenance of the right payment infrastructure at all times by the Bank; 
• Reviewing the metrics and indicators that provide information on customer’s interaction with the Bank using the digital channels and providing direction to management on the actions to be taken to improve the metrics; 
• Providing guidance to Management on developing a policy framework for the development/introduction of digital products/solutions; 
• Providing inputs on the digital products introduced by the Bank with a view to ensure suitability and appropriateness;  
• Reviewing the actions being taken by management to ensure reduction in payment fraud and other cybercrimes; 
• Ensuring that adequate policies are in place to protect customer data and privacy; 
• Ensuring the investment by Management in the Bank’s digital capabilities is aligned to the Bank’s digital strategy as approved by the Board; 
• Reviewing results of customer surveys conducted that provide quantitative and qualitative information on the state of customer experience.  
Review Bank’s Digital Innovation performance via;
i. G-Money quarterly performance  
ii. Card Issuance and usage report
iii. Website performance and capabilities
iv. Internet banking and sms messaging quarterly reports
v. Quarterly report on role out and performance of merchant point of sale device
vi. Customer communication platforms to include social media, social listening and automation
vii. Delivery of real time customer complaint settlement
Review of the Bank’s progress towards achieving its budget in customer growth using electronic products and 
channels and recommend changes for improvement if any.  
The following matters were considered by the Committee in 2022:i. Update on G-Money Subsidiary
ii. G-Money Managed Service Contract – Options for Consideration upon Expiry of the Contract and 
Recommendation(s)
iii. Cessation of the G-Money and Electronic Payments Committee
iv. 2022 G-Money Final Audit ReportCorporate Governance Report (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
58The Company Secretary 
A corporate secretarial team led by Company Secretary, Ms. Amma A. Kusi-Appouh, who has ﬁve (5) years of 
experience in the corporate secretarial function, currently supports the Board. Ms. Amma Kusi-Appouh is a Practicing Lawyer for the past 19 years and a member of the Ghana Bar Association. She has been trained as a Solicitor with a Legal Practice Certiﬁcate from the United Kingdom. She holds a Master of Business Administration from University of Ghana Business School. 
The Board appointed the Company Secretary. She provides counsel to the Board on corporate governance 
matters and advocates the adoption of corporate governance best practices; renders e/uniFB00ective support to the Chairman of the Board/Board Committees and Directors in the discharge of their roles and responsibilities; and facilitates e/uniFB00ective communication of decisions and policies made by the Board/Board Committees to the Management. 
She also ensures that Board procedures, applicable rules and regulations; and relevant laws are complied with. 
Ms. Kusi-Appouh constantly keeps herself abreast with changes in relevant laws; rules and regulations; and industry development through continuous training and regular interaction with various stakeholders. 
The Board assesses the ﬁtness and propriety of the Secretary on an annual basis in accordance with the 
regulator’s directives. The Board is satisﬁed with the performance and support rendered by her as Company Secretary in FY2022. 
Board Activities and Development 
Annual Work Plan 
An Annual Work Plan is drafted each year for the Board, which provides a list of scheduled meetings and Board 
Events that help the Board to shift the balance of its time toward matters that are important. It forces the Board to be realistic and prioritize its available time to properly consider key decisions and other matters of strategic signiﬁcance. The Board of Directors follow an Annual Work Plan and cover all the necessary areas of its work during the year. 
In 2022, the Board scheduled a minimum of six (6) meetings for the year to review progress reports from the 
Management as well as to consider business and other proposals that require the Board’s approval. All Directors were informed of these scheduled Board meetings at the start of the year. Unscheduled Board meetings were called to deliberate and consider issues requiring the Board’s immediate consideration/decision. At each scheduled Board meeting, the Managing Director and Deputy Managing Directors provide regular progress reports on the business and ﬁnancial performance of the Bank. The Board also received regular updates on Internal Control, Risk Management, Legal, Compliance, Internal Audit, Human Resources, Sustainability, Governance and Information Technology related matters among others. 
Board Development 
The Board acknowledges the worth of continuous training for the Directors to gain insights, to further enhance their skills and knowledge in discharging their roles and responsibilities e/uniFB00ectively and to keep abreast with the development in the industry. While the Directors are expected to have personal development skills to improve themselves, they are encouraged to attend a minimum of two (2) training programmes relating to the relevant areas within a ﬁnancial year taking into consideration emerging trends in the Banking industry. 
This is to ensure the Directors are accorded the appropriate training required. The Bank has in place Orientation 
Programme for newly appointed Directors to familiarize themselves with the Bank’s operations in addition to the regulatory mandatory training programmes. Directors also received guidance from the Company Secretary on the Bank’s governance framework and associated policies, as well as their duties as Directors of the Bank. Corporate Governance 
Report (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
59During 2022, the Directors attended the following training programmes:
a. Enterprise Risk Planning/Enterprise Risk Management Master Class by KPMG 
b. Training by Purple Almond Consulting Services:
• Prudential Reporting and Regulatory Compliance
• Electronic Payment System Fraud and Countermeasures
• AML/CFT Regulations/Guideline and Cybersecurity Training
c. Corporate Governance Training organized by Ministry of Finance 
d. Women on Boards’ development Programme for Women on the Board of GCB Bank PLC.
Annual Board Certiﬁcation for Directors
Purple Almond Consulting Services accredited by Bank of Ghana as an Executive Training Consultant for the 
certiﬁcation of Bank Directors took the Board through Annual Certiﬁcation Programme in August 2022. The Board of GCB Bank PLC was duly certiﬁed in accordance with section 12(a) of Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive 2018 that:  
i. The Board had independently assessed and documented its Corporate Governance process and its e/uniFB00ect 
and has successfully achieved it objectives.
ii. The Directors were aware of the responsibilities to the Bank as persons charged with governance. 
iii. Directors have obtained certiﬁcation from Purple Almond Consulting Services having participated in a 
corporate governance programme and have completed a programme on directors’ responsibilities.
Board Performance Evaluation 
The Board reviews its performance, the Board Committees and the performance of the individual Directors, every year. As part of the annual evaluation process, the Board evaluates the quality of the Board meetings and the way the Chairman chairs the meetings. The various Committees and their meetings proceedings are also evaluated to improve leadership, clarify roles and responsibilities, and improve teamwork, greater accountability, better decision-making, improved communication and more e/uniFB03cient Board operations. 
Purple Almond Consulting Services (Consultant) was engaged in 2022 for the services of the bi-annual external 
Board Evaluation in line with the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive. The Consultant assessed these key thematic areas such as the Board’s Understanding of Duties and Liabilities, Board Structure and Composition, Board Practices, Meetings and Procedures, Accountability for Risk Management, Information and Communication Management and Regulatory Compliance.
In sum, the result of the Board Evaluation was that the performance of the Board and its Board Committees was 
e/uniFB00ective for the year under review.
Code of Ethics for the Board and Employees 
Code of Ethics for the Board is enshrined in the Board Charter referred to as the Corporate Governance Framework that is reviewed annually in addition to a Code of Ethics Policy for Directors. 
The Code of Ethics for Board and employees are the standards of conduct expected of the Board, Management 
and sta/uniFB00.  
The Board is governed by unambiguous, pragmatic and e/uniFB00ective group governance framework, which conﬁrms 
that the Board’s deliberations are conducted with a high level of rigour, professionalism and openness. In terms of the Board skill set mix, the Board is made up of highly skilled and experienced individuals from the respective background in banking, ﬁnance, accounting and legal. The Board assumes ultimate responsibility for the Bank’s Corporate Governance Report (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
60ethics performance and compliance with human rights principles. This responsibility is delegated to Executive 
Management while the Board oversees the various tools, processes and systems used to embed an ethical culture in the Bank. 
The principles making up the Code are: 
• acting with honesty, integrity, and due skill, care and diligence; 
• complying with laws and with our policies; 
• respecting conﬁdentiality and do not misuse information; 
• placing importance on our professionalism; 
• working as a team; and 
• managing conﬂicts of interest responsibly. 
The Code’s guiding principles help the Bank to make the right decisions, ensuring that the reputation of the 
Bank is upheld. The Directors and employees of the Bank are also committed to creating greater accountability, transparency and trust with our customers and the broader community. With that in mind, the principles within our Code also reﬂect the community’s expectations of the Bank.
Board Meetings and Attendance 
In 2022, the Board had six (6) scheduled and seven (7) unscheduled meetings.  The Board Committees have delegated authority to meet from time to time to undertake speciﬁc extra duties on behalf of the Board.  
Below is the tabled Attendance Schedule for Directors on Board Meetings and Board Committee Meetings in 
the year under reference. 
Name of Director Board 
Meetings AuditHR & Nominations RiskG-Money and Electronic Payments Credit   IT Digitali-zation & Procure -
ment 
Jude Arthur      13/13 - - - - - -
Mr. John K. Adomakoh 13/13 - - - - - -
M r.  S o crate s  Af ram                 11/13 - - - - - -
Mr. Emmanuel O. Lamptey   13/13 - - - - - -
Mr. Samuel K. Yedu Aidoo12/13 - - - - - -
M r.  R ay  A n k r a h                                8/13 5/5 - 3/4 - - -
Mr. Francis Arthur-Collins  13/13 4/4 - 2/2 - 2/2
Mr. Osmani Aludiba Ayuba 12/13 5/5 - - 2/2 - 2/2
Mrs. Lydia Essah       13/13 - 4/4 4/4 - 3/3 2/2
Nana Ama Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III   7/13 - 4/4 - 2/2 2/3 2/2
Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu 13/13 5/5 - 4/4 - 3/3 -Corporate Governance 
Report (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
61Name of Director Board 
Meetings AuditHR & Nominations RiskG-Money and Electronic Payments Credit   IT Digitali-zation & Procure -
ment 
Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asiriﬁ Esq.13/13 - 4/4 - 2/2 3/3 -
Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah 12/13 5/5 - 4/4 - - -
The Board Calendar (Activities for 2022)
The following were the work done in the year and activities on the annual calendar:
1.  There were six (6) scheduled Board meetings where the Board had ample time for deliberation of critical 
success factors as indicated in the Corporate Governance Framework.
2.  A Strategy Session was done which focused on the following areas:
a. Leadership Pipeline, Sta/uniFB00 Development, Talent Management, Human Resource Policies and Sta/uniFB00  
Motivation.
b. Gaining Competitive Advantage, Strategic Business Objective, Performance Evaluation and Business 
Targets, Industry Share, Quality of Assets, Combined Assurance, ICAAP and ILAAP.
c. Digital Road Map including G-Money, subsidiaries of the Bank and other Investments, Shareholder 
Engagements, CAPEX, ERP and ERM.
3. External Board Evaluation 
4. Annual Board Certiﬁcation
5. AML/CFT & Cybersecurity Training
6. Two (2) Overseas Board Training Programmes
7. Training for the Board Secretary and enhancing capacity of the Secretariat
8. A training programme for Female Directors on the Board and the Board Secretary
9. Selected training programmes for individual Directors based on their speciﬁc needs. 
10. Stakeholder Consultations – The Board engaged the following stakeholders and fora.
 –Sta/uniFB00 Meetings and Durbar
 –Engagement with Unions
 –Government
 –Shareholders 
 –Ghana Stock Exchange
 –Securities and Exchange Commission
 –Bank of GhanaCorporate Governance Report (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
62Remuneration Policy
The Bank has a transparent and comprehensive remuneration system underpinned by industry benchmarked 
approach to compensate sta/uniFB00, executives and the Board.
This sound remuneration strategies and practices reﬂect and promote good corporate governance and 
sustainable long-term value creation for sta/uniFB00, Board and shareholders.
Directors’ Remuneration 
The objective of the Bank’s Policy on Directors’ remuneration is to attract and retain Directors needed to steer the Bank towards achieving its goals e/uniFB00ectively. The determination of the Non-Executive Directors’ remuneration is a matter for the Board as a whole. The level of remuneration of Non-Executive Directors is linked to the level of their responsibilities.
The Bank’s Remuneration Policy covers all employees, including Senior Management of the Bank. Employees 
are also covered by collective bargaining agreements or subject to labour union negotiations and are bound by the terms and conditions of such agreements.
The determination of the remuneration of the Directors is a subject of Shareholders’ Approval. However, the 
Board did not seek for an increment in the Directors’ remuneration at the last AGM in 2022 and accordingly maintained and operated within the Directors’ aggregate remuneration budget of GHS3,850,000 as approved by the Shareholders in 2021. All Non-Executive Directors were paid ﬁxed net monthly fee of GHS13,870.00 and a net sitting allowance of GHS5,600.00 per meeting for each Board or Board Committee meeting attended. The Board Chairman was paid a net monthly fee of GHS20,000.00 and a sitting allowance of GHS7,500.00 per Board meeting. 
Details of the Directors’ remunerations for both Executive and Non-Executive Directors can be found in note 38 
as part of notes to ﬁnancial statement in the annual report. 
Disclosures on Conﬂicts of interests and Related Party transactions 
The Board Corporate Governance Framework is designed to ensure that actual, perceived or potential conﬂicts of interests are identiﬁed, managed or prevented. The Framework outlines the organizational and administrative arrangements that have been put in place to support the identiﬁcation and management of conﬂicts of interest. This guarantees that Directors act at all times in the best interests of the Bank.  
Directors disclose to the Board any conﬂicts or potential conﬂicts of interest they may have in relation to 
particular items of business if any or any related party transaction, at the beginning of every board meeting and submit a written declaration to the Company Secretary. 
Details of all Directors’ conﬂicts of interest are recorded in an Interests and Related Party Transaction Registers, 
which are maintained by the Secretariat in compliance with the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive and Companies Act 2019 (Act 992). 
External Directorship and Other Engagements 
The Directors of GCB Bank PLC are very experienced, and knowledgeable leaders who have other responsibilities and serve on other Boards. To ensure that Directors give greater time commitment to their oversight function in the Bank, no Director holds more than ﬁve (5) directorship positions at a time in both ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial institutions as tabled on page 39-42 of the annual report and in compliance with section 45 of the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive. Corporate Governance 
Report (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
63Internal Controls System 
In 2021 an Internal Control Unit was established. The Bank operates a holistic internal control framework, which 
is envisioned to safeguard the Bank’s assets, and customers’ information and deposits. To do so, the internal control framework operates on a system of checks and balances. 
The Bank’s internal controls framework covers ﬁnancial, operational, compliance, legal and information 
technology controls, as well as risk management policies and systems. The Internal Control department closely work with the ﬁrst line of defence for risk control. This includes 
identi ﬁcation and management of risks inherent in their businesses and ensuring that the Bank remains within 
approved boundaries of our risk appetite and policies. 
Corporate oversight and control functions such as risk, compliance and parts of technology and ﬁnance form 
the second line of defence. They are responsible for design and maintenance of the internal control frameworks covering ﬁnancial, operational, compliance and information technology controls as well as risk management 
policies and systems.  
Internal Audit
The Bank’s Audit & Assurance is the Internal Audit function of the Group, also called the 3rd Line of Defence. 
It provides an independent assessment and assurance on the reliability, adequacy and e/uniFB00ectiveness of our 
system of internal controls, risk management procedures, governance framework and processes. Its role is to provide independent and objective assurance to the Board.
Internal Audit (IA) is structured to be independent of management, with a Chief Internal Auditor, reporting 
directly to the Audit Committee Chairman. The Audit Committee holds regular discussions with the Auditor in the absence of management. The Internal Auditor has free and unrestricted access to all of the Bank’s information, people, property and records to discharge audit and assurance role. 
IA’s responsibilities include among others:
• developing a risk-based annual internal audit plan for the Audit Committee’s approval and adjusting that plan 
where necessary to reﬂect current and emerging risks;
• executing the audit plan in line with approved audit methodologies and reporting the results of its work to the Audit Committee and Management, where appropriate;
• escalating to management and the Audit Committee as appropriate, instances where IA believes that management has accepted a level of risk in excess of the business area’s approved risk appetite. The Internal Auditor also monitors and reports on progress in addressing signiﬁcant control and risk issues.
Succession Planning
To improve our leadership and succession pipeline, the Bank has taken a deliberate approach to developing the senior leaders individually and collectively, starting with a benchmarked, holistic executive talent assessment process. This assessment process is followed by enhanced individual and collective leadership development and engagement initiatives, which commenced in 2022. The Bank also improved its e/uniFB00orts to accelerate the development of next-generation leaders. In so doing, it increased the number of top talents as the Bank’s e/uniFB00orts to enhance our employer brand and attracted top talents in 2022. Furthermore, the Bank engaged Korn Ferry to help shape the Bank for the Succession Planning and Leadership Pipeline.  Corporate Governance Report (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
64The Bank also has E-Learning programmes, a comprehensive training and development portal which provides 
series of online tutorials designed to help sta/uniFB00 to develop a deeper understanding of the ﬁnancial services market.  Its feature-rich functionality enables sta/uniFB00 to manage and track their learning activities. It is also designed for study on tablet devices, such as iPads and Android devices, and can be downloaded from the Apple App Store or Android Store. This accord sta/uniFB00 the privilege to access the learning and development opportunities they needed.
Environmental, Social and Governance Framework
At GCB Bank PLC, we are committed to our purpose and to a brighter future. That means a focus on sound Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) practices – not just because it is the right thing to do, but because investing and operating sustainably allows us to deliver better value. 
The Bank’s various initiatives to incorporate ESG criteria into our operating framework reﬂect our commitment 
to our customers, partners, shareholders, and employees and the communities in which we operate. Our view on ESG is that it is a continuous process of aligning our operations and controls with our values.
Our approach to ESG management includes having robust governance systems, risk management and controls; 
striving to serve our customers exceptionally and transparently; investing in our employees and cultivating a diverse and inclusive work environment; and working to strengthen the communities in which we live and work.
Environmental - We are committed to limiting our environmental impact through the e/uniFB03cient use of natural 
resources, mitigating climate-related risks, and leveraging innovative energy solutions.
Social - We are committed to the e/uniFB00ective management of our relationships with key stakeholders including 
clients, employees, regulators, suppliers and the communities in which we operate.
Governance - We are committed to operating with strong ethical business practices, fair and equitable 
compensation, a diversiﬁed Board of Directors and policies that acknowledge local, international and regulatory principles.
In GCB, governance is not an exercise in compliance, nor is it a speciﬁc form of management, it is an essential 
part of our public service ethos.
ESG Risk Management - Our Management Risk and Control (MRC) Committee drives our ESG agenda at the 
Senior Management level. Structured around our key stakeholder groups, it brings all our material ESG challenges together into one forum.
Reporting on our ESG Duties - We work to keep our ESG reporting at a level we believe appropriate for our 
business and useful for our stakeholders. Our approach is determined not only by reporting obligations, but also to provide insight into what matters most to our business and our stakeholders and to share our progress in each area. This provides assurance that we are properly addressing our responsibilities and communicating our ESG position and performance across relevant stakeholders.Corporate Governance 
Report (Continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
65Report on the Audit of the Consolidated and Separate Financial Statements
Opinion 
We have audited the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements of GCB Bank PLC and its subsidiary (the 
Group and the Bank), set out on pages 72 to 173, which comprise the consolidated and separate statements of ﬁnancial position as at 31 December 2022, and the consolidated and separate statements of proﬁt or loss and other comprehensive income, consolidated and separate statements of changes in equity and consolidated and separate statements of cash ﬂows for the year then ended, the notes to the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements, including a summary of signiﬁcant accounting policies and other explanatory disclosures. 
In our opinion, the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements give a true and fair view of the consolidated 
and separate ﬁnancial position of GCB Bank PLC as at 31 December 2022, and its consolidated and separate ﬁnancial performance and consolidated and separate cash ﬂows for the year then ended in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards, the requirements of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking-Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).
Basis for Opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISAs). Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors’ Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of our report. We are independent of the Group and Bank in accordance with the requirements of the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants’ (IESBA), International Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants (including International Independence Standards) (IESBA code) and other independence requirements applicable to performing audits of ﬁnancial statements in Ghana. We have fulﬁlled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with the IESBA Code and other ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of ﬁnancial statements in Ghana. 
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is su/uniFB03cient and appropriate to provide a basis for our 
opinion. 
Key Audit Matters
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgement, were of most signiﬁcance in our audit of the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements of the current period. These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements as a whole, and in forming our opinion thereon, and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters. We have determined that there are key audit matters to communicate in our report regarding the audit of the separate ﬁnancial statements of the Bank for the current period. Independent Auditor’s 
Report
to the shareholders of GCB Bank PLCGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
66Impairment of Investments in Government 
SecuritiesResponse
As disclosed in Note 15b, total impairment loss related to investment securities as at 31 December, 2022 was GHS 1.8 billion as a result of the Debt Exchange Programme. 
This is the ﬁrst time the Group is assessing 
government securities for impairment and due to the signiﬁcant judgements that are applied by management, we consider this to be a key audit matter. 
As described in Note 26, at 31 December 2022, the 
Group’s total exposures held in government securities was GHS 10.5 billion with an associated impairment of GHS 1.8 billion.
The areas of signiﬁcant judgment within the ECL 
process includes:
• Whether the debt exchange programme is considered an adjustment subsequent event.
• The determination of cashﬂows of the new bonds in accordance with the ﬁnancial terms of the new bonds.
• Whether an appropriate discount rate is used to calculate the Estimated credit loss of the relevant government bonds. The determination of the discount rate is complex as the new bonds do not have an active trading market.
• Whether there is increased credit risk around other instruments issued by the Government of Ghana.
• Whether the disclosures around the impairment of these investments are considered relevant to the users of the ﬁnancial statement and in accordance with the applicable accounting standardsWe performed the following procedures on the ECL for investments in government securities with the assistance of our credit specialists:
• We evaluated the design and tested the implementation of the key controls over the computation of impairment loss.
• In evaluating the design of control, we considered the appropriateness of the control considering the nature and signiﬁcance of the risk, competence and authority of the person(s) performing the control, frequency and consistency with which the control is performed.
• We tested the completeness of the investments held with the Government of Ghana, obtained conﬁrmations  and reconciled the carrying amount of each category of investment to ensure all eligible bonds and other related exposures are fully assessed for impairment.
• We evaluated the treatment of the valuation of the bonds as adjusting subsequent events.
• For eligible bonds, we reviewed the expected cashﬂow and payments-in-kind from the new bonds based on the ﬁnancial terms provided in the exchange memorandum.
• We have engaged our internal specialist to challenge the appropriateness of the discount rate used for determining the present value of cashﬂows for the new bonds and also ensured that the rate used is within the acceptable range issued by the accounting and banking regulators.
• For other investments held with the Government of Ghana, we challenged management on the appropriate staging, determination of an appropriate Loss Given Default (LGD) and Probability of Default (PD) for each category of investment.
• We found that the assumptions used by management were comparable with current macroeconomic trends and have been assessed as reasonable.
• Evaluated the appropriate application of regulatory directives on accounting for eligible bonds.Independent Auditor’s 
Report
to the shareholders of GCB Bank PLC (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
67Impairment of Investments in Government 
SecuritiesResponse
• We further tested the disclosures to ensure that the disclosures have been made in accordance with the requirements of IFRS 9.
Based on the procedures performed, we found the judgement made by the Group and Bank reasonable and assess the related disclosures as appropriate. 
Expected Credit Losses (ECL) on Loans and AdvancesResponse
As at 31 December 2022, the Group’s loans and advances portfolio was GHS 6.7 billion (2021: GHS 5.2 billion) with an associated impairment allowance for expected credit losses (“ECL” or “allowance for impairment”) of GHS 1.1 billion (2021: GHS 810 million). 
As described in Note 4, ECL represents a complex 
accounting estimate, which is based on management’s evaluation of probable loan losses inherent in the loan portfolio.
Expected credit losses is considered to be a key 
audit matter due to the level of subjective judgement applied in determining ECL.
Corporate loans are an individually signiﬁcant 
component of the loans and advances account balance, representing 66% of the net loan book. Allowance for impairment arising on corporate loans represent 91% of the ECL at 31 December 2022. The determination of related loss allowance is judgmental in nature. The areas of signiﬁcant management judgement within the ECL measurement process include:
• The assessment of whether an exposure has met predeﬁned default criteria as at the reporting date (i.e., a trigger event that has caused a deterioration in credit risk and resulted in migration of the loan from Stage 2 to Stage 3);We performed the following procedures on the ECL for corporate loans and advances with the assistance of our credit specialists:
• Updated our understanding of management’s processes around the measurement of the ECL including management’s modelling methodology, incorporation of assumptions and input data.
• Updated our understanding of management’s policies and procedures around the reliability of qualitative and quantitative information as well as the calibration of the ECL model and ECL output. 
• Assessed the design and implementation of the relevant ﬁnancial reporting controls as well as the general and application computer controls relating to input data and delinquency (days past due), early alert monitoring, LGD and Staging. 
• Assessed conformity of management’s ECL accounting policy in the context of IFRS 9 and regulatory directives.
• Assessed the appropriateness of the ECL methodology, including any reﬁnements against actual experience and industry practice.
• Using an audit sample, agreed the input data (days past due, delinquency) to underlying audit evidence including loan systems data, inquiries from relevant Bank personnel and loan documentation.
• For a sample of loans identiﬁed by management as having no indicators of signiﬁcant increases in credit risk (SICR) and/or default criteria, we determined if this was reasonable by forming an independent view based on available information (generated internally by the Bank or publicly available) and respective industry and segment Independent Auditor’s Report to the 
shareholders of GCB Bank Plc (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
68Expected Credit Losses (ECL) on Loans and 
AdvancesResponse
• Loss Given Default (LGD) — This is an estimate of the loss arising from default. It is based on the di/uniFB00erence between the contractual cash ﬂows due and those that the lender would expect to receive, including any collateral.  Calibration of the LGD model is complex and requires management to accurately evaluate loss rates on secured and unsecured loan assets.• information on whether SICR or default indicators were present. 
• Assessed the impact of the Domestic Debt Exchanged on government related exposures. 
• Assessed the Loss Given Default model for appropriate calibration of secured and unsecured loan assets, default and write o/uniFB00 information.
Based on the procedures performed, we found the judgement made by the Group and Bank reasonable and assess the related disclosures as appropriate. 
Other Information
The directors are responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the Report of the Directors, the Statement of Directors’ Responsibilities, the Corporate Governance Report, the Chairman’s Statement, the Report of the Audit Committee, which we obtained prior to the date of this report, and the Annual Report, which is expected to be made available to us after that date. The other information does not include the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements and our auditor’s report thereon.
Our opinion on the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements does not cover the other information and we 
do not and will not express an audit opinion or any form of assurance conclusion thereon. 
In connection with our audit of the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements, our responsibility is to read 
the other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to be materially misstated. If, based on the work we have performed on the other information obtained prior to the date of this auditor’s report, we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in this regard.
When we read the Annual Report, if we conclude that there is a material misstatement therein, we are required 
to communicate the matter to those charged with governance.
Responsibilities of the Directors for the Consolidated and Separate Financial Statements
The directors are responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards, the requirements of the Companies  Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking-Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. 
In preparing the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements, the directors are responsible for assessing the 
Group’s and the Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group and/or the Bank or to cease operations, or have no realistic alternative but to do so. Independent Auditor’s 
Report
to the shareholders of GCB Bank PLC (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
69Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Consolidated and Separate Financial 
Statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial 
statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to inﬂuence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements. 
As part of an audit in accordance with ISAs, we exercise professional judgement and maintain professional 
scepticism throughout the audit. We also: 
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is su/uniFB03cient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. 
• Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the e/uniFB00ectiveness of the Group’s and the Bank’s internal control. 
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by the directors. 
• Conclude on the appropriateness of the directors’ use of the going concern basis of accounting and based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast signiﬁcant doubt on the Group’s and the Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern. If we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are required to draw attention in our auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify our opinion. Our conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of our auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Group and/ or the Bank to cease to continue as a going concern. 
• Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements, including the disclosures, and whether the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation. 
• Obtain su/uniFB03cient appropriate audit evidence regarding the ﬁnancial information of the entities or business activities within the Group to express an opinion on the consolidated ﬁnancial statements. We are responsible for the direction, supervision and performance of the group audit. We remain solely responsible for our audit opinion. 
We communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and signiﬁcant audit ﬁndings, including any signiﬁcant deﬁciencies in internal control that we identify during our audit. 
We also provide those charged with governance with a statement that we have complied with relevant ethical 
requirements regarding independence, and to communicate with them all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on our independence, and where applicable, actions taken to eliminate threats or safeguards applied. Independent Auditor’s Report to the 
shareholders of GCB Bank Plc (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
70From the matters communicated with those charged with governance, we determine those matters that were 
of most signiﬁcance in the audit of the consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements of the current year and are therefore the key audit matters. We describe these matters in our auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, in extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a matter should not be communicated in our report because the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest beneﬁts of such communication.
Report on Other Legal and Regulatory Requirements
In accordance with the Seventh Schedule of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) we expressly state that:
1.  We have obtained the information and explanations, which to the best of our knowledge and belief were 
necessary for the purpose of the audit.
2.  In our opinion:
• proper books of account have been kept by the Group, so far as appears from our examination of those 
books. 
• the information and explanations given to us, were in the manner required by the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and give a true and fair view of the:
a. statement of ﬁnancial position of the Group at the end of the ﬁnancial year, and 
b. statement of proﬁt or loss and other comprehensive income for the ﬁnancial year.
• the group accounts have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992), to give a true and fair view of the state of a/uniFB00airs, and the proﬁt or loss of the Bank and its subsidiary.
3.  The Group’s statement of ﬁnancial position and statement of proﬁt or loss and other comprehensive income are in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
4. The group account has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992), to 
give a true and fair view of the state of a/uniFB00airs, and the proﬁt or loss of the Bank and its subsidiaries.
5. We are independent of the group, pursuant to Section 143 of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992).
The Banks and Specialized Deposit-Taking Institution Act, 2016 (Act 930) requires that we state certain matters in our report. We hereby state that:
1.  We conﬁrm that the accounts give a true and fair view of the state of the a/uniFB00airs of the Bank and the results 
of operations for the year under review.
2.  We were able to obtain all the information and explanation required for the e/uniFB03cient performance of our duties as auditors.
3.  We conﬁrm that the transactions of the entity were within the powers of the Bank.
4.  In our opinion, the Bank has generally complied with the provisions of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2008 (Act 749), as amended by the Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment) Act, 2014 (Act 874), the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2008 (Act 762) and Regulations made under these enactments.
5.  The Bank has generally complied with the provisions of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).Independent Auditor’s 
Report
to the shareholders of GCB Bank PLC (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
71The engagement partner on the audit resulting in this independent auditor’s report is Daniel Kwadwo Owusu 
(ICAG/P/1327).
 
 For and on behalf of Deloitte & Touche (ICAG/F/2023/129)Chartered AccountantsThe Deloitte Place, Plot No.71O/uniFB00 George Walker Bush HighwayNorth DzorwuluAccra Ghana25th April 2023
  Independent Auditor’s Report to the 
shareholders of GCB Bank Plc (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
722022 2021
/uni00A0Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Note(s) Bank Group Bank Group
Interest income 9  2,813,805  2,829,445  2,369,457  2,379,370 
Interest expense 10  (722,006)  (721,943)  (484,620)  (484,527)
Net interest income  2,091,799  2,107,502  1,884,837  1,894,843 
Fee and commission income 11  439,224  458,316  390,408  410,277 
Fee and commission expense 12  (66,630)  (73,310)  (50,749)  (50,749)
Net fee and commission income  372,594  385,006  339,659  359,528 
Net trading income 13  487,226  487,226  157,540  157,540 
Other operating income 14  19,792  25,933  9,576  15,582 
Operating income  2,971,411  3,005,667  2,391,612  2,427,493 
Net impairment loss on loans 15a (274,051) (274,051) (324,800) (324,800)
Net impairment loss on Investment securities 15b (1,814,474)  (1,831,208)  -  - 
Personnel expenses 17  (796,993)  (801,593)  (637,316)  (641,555)
Depreciation and amortisation 29,30  (145,074)  (154,215)  (148,171)  (148,466)
Other expenses 16  (647,071)  (676,144)  (471,520)  (473,725)
Operating proﬁt/(loss)  (706,252)  (731,544)  809,805  838,947 
Share of proﬁt of associates, net of tax 28  -  (11,915)  -  (6,972)
Proﬁt/(Loss) before income tax  (706,252)  (743,459)  809,805  831,975 
Income tax expense 18  150,454  150,061  (253,138)  (259,694)
Proﬁt/(Loss) for the year  (555,798)  (593,398)  556,667  572,281 Statements of Proﬁt or Loss 
and Other Comprehensive Income
For the year ended 31 December 2022GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
732022 2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Note Bank Group Bank Group
Other comprehensive income:
Items that will not be reclassiﬁed to 
proﬁt or loss:
Re-measurements on net deﬁned beneﬁt 
liability/asset 35  (10,097)  (10,097)  4,540  4,540 
Fair value of equity instruments 24  497  17,014  1,446  284 
Income tax relating to items that will not be reclassiﬁed20  (2,648)  (7,068)  1,337  629 
Total items that will not be reclassiﬁed to proﬁt or loss (12,248)  (151)  7,323  5,453 
Items that may be reclassiﬁed to proﬁt or loss: /uni00A0 /uni00A0 /uni00A0 /uni00A0
Exchange di/uniFB00erences on translating foreign operations 28  -  32,887  -  (8,836)
Share of comprehensive income/(loss) of associates 28  -  (6,437)  -  (4,314)
Net gain on equity investments  -  -  -  14,139 
Income tax relating to items that may be reclassiﬁed  -  -  -  - 
Total items that may be reclassiﬁed to proﬁt or loss -  26,450  -  989 
Other  comprehensive  income/(loss)  for  the  year  net  of tax (12,248)  26,299  7,323  6,442 
Total comprehensive income/(loss) for the year (568,046)  (567,099)  563,990  578,723 
Proﬁt attributable to: /uni00A0 /uni00A0 /uni00A0 /uni00A0
Owners of the parent  (555,798)  (593,398)  556,667  572,281 
Non-controlling interest - - - - 
 (555,798)  (593,398)  556,667  572,281 
Total comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to:/uni00A0 /uni00A0 /uni00A0 /uni00A0
Owners of the parent  (568,046)  (567,099)  563,990  578,723 
Non-controlling interest - - - - 
 (568,046)  (567,099)  563,990  578,723 
Earnings per share /uni00A0 /uni00A0 /uni00A0 /uni00A0
Basic earnings per share (GHp) 21  (210)  (224)  210  216 
Diluted earnings per share (GHp) 21  (210)  (224)  210  216 
The notes on pages 82 to 173 form an integral part of these consolidated ﬁnancial statements.Statements of Proﬁt or Loss and Other 
Comprehensive Income
For the year ended 31 December 2022 (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
74  2022 2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Note Bank Group Bank Group
Assets      
Cash and cash equivalents 22 4,476,878 4,476,878 2,301,092 2,301,092
Non-pledged trading assets 23 275,992 275,992 477,658 477,658
Investments (other than securities) 24 4,277 43,346 3,779 26,366
Loans and advances to customers 25i 5,482,215 5,482,215 4,306,380 4,306,380
Advances to banks 25ii 229,115 229,115 201,030 201,030
Investment securities 26 8,610,561 8,673,601 9,707,421 9,765,840
Investments in associates 28 28,274 92,678 28,274 82,280
Investments in subsidiary 27 3,000  100 1,000  -    
Deferred tax assets 20 757,825 758,124 237,927 238,171
Current tax assets 19  6,818  5,980  -     -    
Intangible assets 30 115,028 123,752 167,999 168,226
Other assets 31 938,588 902,983 527,263 536,552
Property, equipment and ROU 29 428,550 429,654 300,458 301,332
Total assets 21,357,121 21,494,418 18,260,281 18,404,927
Liabilities
Deposits from banks & other ﬁnancial 
institutions32i 259,147 259,147 747,589 747,589
Deposits from customers 32ii 17,532,247 17,515,911 13,165,666 13,154,527
Borrowings 34 1,003,168 1,003,168 988,073 988,073
Current tax liabilities 19  -     -    54,580 56,247
Employee beneﬁt obligation 35 129,596 129,596 113,464 113,464
Other liabilities 33 586,477 587,724 643,877 646,556
Total liabilities 19,510,635 19,495,546 15,713,249 15,706,456
Equity
Stated capital 36i 500,000 500,000 500,000 500,000
Retained earnings 746,039 821,937 1,434,337 1,547,835
Statutory reserve 36ii 639,555 639,555 639,555 639,555
Fair value reserve 36iv 267 21,030 (106) 14,997
Other reserves 36v (39,375) 16,350 (26,754) (3916)
Total shareholders’ equity 1,846,486 1,998,872 2,547,032 2,698,471
Total liabilities and shareholders’ 
equity21,357,121 21,494,418 18,260,281 18,404,927
The notes on pages 82 to 173 form an integral part of these consolidated ﬁnancial statements.Statements of Financial 
Position
As at 31 December 2022GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
75The consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements and the notes on pages 72 to 173 were approved by the 
Board of Directors on 18th April, 2023 and signed on its behalf by:
Mr. Jude Koﬁ Arthur
ChairmanMr. Koﬁ AdomakohManaging DirectorStatements of Financial Position
as at 31 December 2022 (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
76Stated 
capitalFair value 
reservesOther 
reservesStatutory 
reservesTotal 
reservesRetained 
earningsTotal 
equity
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Bank
Balance at 
1 January 2022 500,000  (106)  (26,754)  639,555  612,695 1,434,337  2,547,032 
Total comprehensive income, net of income tax:
Proﬁt for the year  -  -  -  -  - (555,798)  (555,798)
Other 
comprehensive income, net of income tax:
Fair value change 
in equity instruments  -  373  -  -  373  -  373 
Re-measurement of deﬁned beneﬁt liability  -  -  (12,621)  -  (12,621)  -  (12,621)
Total other comprehensive income  -  373  (12,621)  -  (12,248)  -  (12,248)
Total comprehensive income for the year  -  373  (12,621)  -  (12,248) 
(555,798)  (568,046)
Transfer to/from reserves:
Statutory reserves  -  -  -  -  -  -  - Total Transfer to/
from reserves  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Transactions with owners
Dividends  -  -  -  -  - (132,500)  (132,500)
Total transactions 
with equity holders  -  -  -  -  -  
(132,500)  (132,500)
Balance at 31 December 2022  500,000  267  (39,375)  639,555  
600,447  746,039  1,846,486 
The notes on pages 82 to 173 form an integral part of these consolidated ﬁnancial statements.Statement of Changes in 
Equity 
For the year ended 31 December 2022GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
77Stated 
capitalFair value 
reservesOther 
reservesStatutory 
reservesTotal 
reservesRetained 
earningsTotal 
equity
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Bank
Balance at 1 January 
2021 500,000 (1,754) (32,429) 569,971 535,788 1,013,504 2,049,292 
Total comprehensive income, net of income tax:
Proﬁt for the year - - - - - 556,667 556,667 
Other 
comprehensive income, net of income tax:
Fair value change in 
equity instruments - 1,648 - - 1,648 - 1,648 
Re-measurement of deﬁned beneﬁt liability - - 5,675 - 5,675 - 5,675 
Total other comprehensive income - 1,648 5,675 - 7,323 - 7,323 
Total comprehensive income for the year - 1,648 5,675 - 7,323 556,667 563,990 
Transfer to/from reserves:
Statutory reserves - - - 69,584 69,584 (69,584) -
Total Transfer to/
from reserves - - - 69,584 69,584 (69,584) -
Transactions with owners
Dividends - - - - - (66,250) (66,250)
Total transactions 
with equity holders - - - --(66,250) (66,250)
Balance at 31 December 2021500,000 (106) (26,754) 639,555 612,695 1,434,337 2,547,032 
The notes on pages 82 to 173 form an integral part of these consolidated ﬁnancial statements.Statement of Changes in Equity 
For the year ended 31 December 2022 (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
78Stated 
capitalFair value 
reservesOther 
reservesStatutory 
reservesTotal 
reservesRetained 
earningsTotal 
equity
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
GroupBalance at 1 January 
2022500,000  14,998  (3,916)  639,555  650,637 1,547,835 2,698,472 
Total comprehensive income, net of income tax:
Proﬁt for the year  -  -  -  -  -  (593,398)  (593,398)
Other comprehensive 
income, net of income tax:
Fair value change in 
equity instruments, net of tax  -  12,469  -  -  12,469  -  12,469 
Re-measurement of deﬁned beneﬁt liability, net of tax  -  -  (12,621)  -  (12,621)  -  (12,621)
Share of associate OCI  -  (6,437)  -  -  (6,437)  -  (6,437)
Net gain on equity investment  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Foreign currency translation di/uniFB00erences for foreign operations  -  -  32,887  -  32,887  -  32,887 
Total other comprehensive income  -  6,032  20,266  -  26,298  -  26,298 
Total comprehensive income for the year  -  6,032  20,266  -  26,298  (593,398)  (567,100)
Transfer to/from reserves:
Statutory reserve  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Total transfer to/from 
reserves  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Transactions with shareholders
Dividends  -  -  -  -  -  (132,500)  (132,500)
Total transactions 
with equity holders  -  -  -  -  -  (132,500)  (132,500)
Balance at 31 December 2022 
500,000  21,030  16,350  639,555  676,935  821,937  1,998,872 
The notes on pages 82 to 173 form an integral part of these consolidated ﬁnancial statements.Statement of Changes in Equity 
For the year ended 31 December 2022 (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
79Stated 
capitalFair value 
reservesOther 
reservesStatutory 
reservesTotal 
reservesRetained 
earningsTotal 
equity
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
GroupBalance at 1 January 
2021 500,000 5,395 (755) 569,971 574,611 1,111,387 2,185,998 
Total comprehensive income, net of income tax:
Proﬁt for the year - - - - - 572,281 572,281 
Other comprehensive 
income, net of income tax:
Fair value change in 
equity instruments, net of tax - (222) - - (222) - (222)
Re-measurement of deﬁned beneﬁt liability, net of tax - - 5,675 - 5,675 - 5,675 
Share of associate OCI - (4,314) - - (4,314) - (4,314)
Net gain on equity investment - 14,139 - - 14,139 - 14,139 
Foreign currency translation di/uniFB00erences for foreign operations - - (8,836) - (8,836) - (8,836)
Total other comprehensive income  - 9,603 (3,161)  - 6,442  - 6,442 
Total comprehensive income for the year - 9,603 (3,161)  - 6,442 572,281 578,723 
Transfer to/from reserves
Statutory reserve  -  -  - 69,584 69,584 (69,584)  - 
Total transfer to/from 
reserves- - - 69,584 69,584 (69,584) -
Transactions with shareholders
Dividends - - - - - (66,250) (66,250)
Total transactions with 
equity holders- - - - - (66,250) (66,250)
Balance at 31 December 2021 500,000 14,998 (3,916) 639,555 650,636 1,547,835 2,698,471 
The notes on pages 82 to 173 form an integral part of these consolidated ﬁnancial statements.Statement of Changes in Equity 
For the year ended 31 December 2022 (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
80         2022       2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Note(s) Bank Group Bank Group
Cash ﬂows from operating activities
Proﬁt for the period  (555,798)  (593,398)  556,667  572,281 
Adjustments for:
Depreciation and amortisation 29  145,074  154,215  148,169  148,464 
Net impairment loss on ﬁnancial assets 15  2,088,525  2,105,259  324,800  324,800 
Employee beneﬁt expense 17  22,303  22,303  20,995  20,995 
Share of loss/(proﬁt) of associates 28  -  11,915  -  6,972 
Net interest income 9,10  (2,091,799)  (2,107,502)  (1,884,837)  (1,894,843)
Dividend income 14  (2,697)  (8,838)  (571)  (6,578)
Proﬁt/Loss on sale of property and 
equipment14  (315)  (315)  (137)  (137)
Foreign exchange (gain)/loss 13  295,815  295,815  (45,552)  (45,552)
Income tax expense 18  (150,454)  (150,061)  253,138  259,694 
 (249,346)  (270,607)  (627,328)  (613,904)
Changes in non-pledged trading assets 23  201,666  201,666  (256,319)  (256,319)
Changes in derivative assets  -  -  -  - 
Changes in advances to banks 25ii  (28,085)  (28,085)  (126)  (126)
Changes in loans and advances to customers 25i  (1,415,749)  (1,415,749)  (1,018,592)  (1,018,592)
Changes in other assets 31  (411,325)  (366,431)  (66,830)  (73,851)
Changes in deposit from banks and other ﬁnancial institutions32i  (488,442)  (488,442)  132,171  132,171 
Changes in deposits from customers 32ii  4,335,312  4,330,115  1,813,148  1,809,287 
Changes in borrowings 34  7,684  7,684  215,548  215,548 
Changes in other liabilities 33  (57,400)  (58,832)  222,296  225,161 
Employee beneﬁt paid 35  (16,268)  (16,268)  (16,312)  (16,312)
Cash (used in)/ generated from operations  1,878,047  1,895,051  397,656  403,063 
Interest received  2,815,176  2,829,493  2,389,140  2,399,061 
Dividend received  2,697  13,030  571  10,086 
Interest paid  (683,327)  (683,327)  (478,184)  (478,277)
Net income tax paid  (433,491)  (439,187)  (251,439)  (256,715)
Net cash from operating activities  3,579,102  3,615,060  2,057,744  2,077,218 Statements of Cash Flows
For the year ended 31 December 2022GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
81         2022       2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Note(s) Bank Group Bank Group
Cash ﬂows from investing activities
Purchase of investments (other than 
securities)24bi  -  34  -  (7,549)
Purchase of investments (subsidiary)  (2,000)  (100)  -  - 
Purchase of investment securities 26  (753,121)  (773,144)  (1,157,639)  (1,169,024)
Purchase of property, equip. & right-of-use asset 29  (199,616)  (200,329)  (88,735)  (89,229)
Proceeds from the sale of property, equipment & right-of- use assets 29  358  358  461  461 
Purchase of intangible assets 30  (20,622)  (37,778)  (57,282)  (57,328)
Net cash used in investing activities  (975,001)  (1,010,959)  (1,303,195)  (1,322,669)
Cash ﬂows from ﬁnancing activities
Dividends paid  (132,500)  (132,500)  (66,250)  (66,250)
Net cash used in ﬁnancing activities  (132,500)  (132,500)  (66,250)  (66,250)
Net (decrease)/increase in cash and 
cash equivalents  2,471,601  2,471,601  688,299  688,299 
Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January 22  2,301,092  2,301,092  1,567,241  1,567,241 
E/uniFB00ect of Exchange rate ﬂuctuations on cash held  (295,815)  (295,815)  45,552  45,552 
Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 22  4,476,878  4,476,878  2,301,092  2,301,092 
The notes on pages 82 to 173 form an integral part of these consolidated ﬁnancial statements.Statements of Cash Flows 
For the year ended 31 December 2022 (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
821. Reporting entity
GCB Bank PLC is a limited liability company incorporated and domiciled in Ghana. These consolidated ﬁnancial 
statements as at and for the year ended 31 December 2022 comprise the Bank and its subsidiaries, (together referred to as the ‘Group’) and the Group’s interest in associates. The separate ﬁnancial statements as at and for the year ended 31 December 2022 comprise the ﬁnancial statements of the Bank.
The Bank is listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange.
2. New and amended IFRS Accounting Standards that are e/uniFB00ective for the current year 
(2022)
In the current year, the Company has applied a number of amendments to IFRS Accounting Standards issued by 
the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) that are mandatorily e/uniFB00ective for an accounting period that begins on or after 1 January 2022. Their adoption has not had any material impact on the disclosures or on the amounts reported in these ﬁnancial statements.
2.1 Amendments to IFRS 3 Reference to the Conceptual Framework
The Company has adopted the amendments to IFRS 3 Business Combinations for the ﬁrst time in the current year. The amendments update IFRS 3 so that it refers to the 2018 Conceptual Framework instead of the 1989 Framework. They also add to IFRS 3 a requirement that, for obligations within the scope of IAS 37 Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets, an acquirer applies IAS 37 to determine whether at the acquisition date a present obligation exists as a result of past events. For a levy that would be within the scope of IFRIC 21 Levies, the acquirer applies IFRIC 21 to determine whether the obligating event that gives rise to a liability to pay the levy has occurred by the acquisition date.
The amendments add an exception to the recognition principle of IFRS 3 Business Combinations to avoid the 
issue of potential ‘day 2’ gains or losses arising for liabilities and contingent liabilities that would be within the scope of IAS 37 Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets or IFRIC 21 Levies, if incurred separately. 
The amendments also add a new paragraph to IFRS 3 to clarify that contingent assets do not qualify for 
recognition at the acquisition date.
2.2 Amendments to IAS 16 Property, Plant and Equipment—Proceeds before Intended Use
The Company has adopted the amendments to IAS 16 for the ﬁrst time in the current year. The amendments prohibit deducting from the cost of an item of property, plant and equipment any proceeds from selling items produced before that asset is available for use, i.e. proceeds while bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management. Consequently, an entity recognises such sales proceeds and related costs in proﬁt or loss. The entity measures the cost of those items in accordance with IAS 2 Inventories.
The amendments also clarify the meaning of ‘testing whether an asset is functioning properly’. IAS 16 now 
speciﬁes this as assessing whether the technical and physical performance of the asset is such that it is capable of being used in the production or supply of goods or services, for rental to others, or for administrative purposes.
If not presented separately in the statement of comprehensive income, the ﬁnancial statements shall disclose 
the amounts of proceeds and cost included in proﬁt or loss that relate to items produced that are not an output of the entity’s ordinary activities, and which line item(s) in the statement of comprehensive income include(s) such proceeds and cost.Notes to the Financial 
StatementsGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
832.3 Amendments to IAS 37 Onerous Contracts – Cost of Fulﬁlling a Contract
The Company has adopted the amendments to IAS 37 for the ﬁrst time in the current year. The amendments 
specify that the cost of fulﬁlling a contract comprises the costs that relate directly to the contract. Costs that relate directly to a contract consist of both the incremental costs of fulﬁlling that contract (examples would be direct labour or materials) and an allocation of other costs that relate directly to fulﬁlling contracts (an example would be the allocation of the depreciation charge for an item of property, plant and equipment used in fulﬁlling the contract).
General and administrative costs do not relate directly to a contract and are excluded unless they are explicitly 
chargeable to the counterparty under the contract.
2.4 Annual Improvements to IFRS Accounting Standards 2018-2020 Cycle
The Group has adopted the amendments included in the Annual Improvements to IFRS Accounting Standards 2018-2020 Cycle for the ﬁrst time in the current year. The Annual Improvements include amendments to four standards.
[IFRS 1 First-time Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards]
The amendment provides additional relief to a subsidiary which becomes a ﬁrst-time adopter later than its parent in respect of accounting for cumulative translation di/uniFB00erences. As a result of the amendment, a subsidiary that uses the exemption in IFRS 1:D16(a) can now also elect to measure cumulative translation di/uniFB00erences for all foreign operations at the carrying amount that would be included in the parent’s consolidated ﬁnancial statements, based on the parent’s date of transition to IFRS Accounting Standards, if no adjustments were made for consolidation procedures and for the e/uniFB00ects of the business combination in which the parent acquired the subsidiary. A similar election is available to an associate or joint venture that uses the exemption in IFRS 1:D16(a).
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments
The amendment clariﬁes that in applying the ‘10 percent’ test to assess whether to derecognize a ﬁnancial liability, an entity includes only fees paid or received between the entity (the borrower) and the lender, including fees paid or received by either the entity or the lender on the other’s behalf.
IFRS 16 Leases
The amendment removes illustration of the reimbursement of leasehold improvements.
IAS 41 Agriculture
The amendment removes the requirement in IAS 41 for entities to exclude cash ﬂows for taxation when measuring fair value. This aligns the fair value measurement in IAS 41 with the requirements of IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement to use internally consistent cash ﬂows and discount rates and enables preparers to determine whether to use pre-tax or post-tax cash ﬂows and discount rates for the most appropriate fair value measurement.
3. Basis of preparation
3.1. Statement of compliance
The consolidated and separate ﬁnancial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (“IFRS as issued by the IASB”) and in the manner required by the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992), and the Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
843.2.Basis of measurement
The ﬁnancial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis, except for the following material 
items, which are measured at fair value:
 –ﬁnancial assets measured at fair value and,
 –deﬁned beneﬁt obligations measured at present value. 
Historical cost is generally based on the fair value of the consideration given in exchange for goods and services.
The Group’s accounting policy on fair value is set out in note 7.
3.3. Functional and presentation currency
The ﬁnancial statements are presented in Ghana Cedis, which is the Bank’s functional currency. All ﬁnancial 
information presented in Ghana Cedis have been rounded to the nearest thousands, except when otherwise indicated.
3.4. Presentation of ﬁnancial statements
The Group presents its statement of ﬁnancial position in order of liquidity based on the Group’s intention and perceived ability to recover/settle the majority of assets/liabilities of the corresponding ﬁnancial statement line item. An analysis regarding recovery or settlement within 12 months after the reporting date (current) and more than 12 months after the reporting date (non–current) is presented under a note item where applicable.
Financial assets and liabilities are generally reported gross in the consolidated statement of ﬁnancial position 
except when IFRS netting criteria are met.
4. Summary of signiﬁcant accounting policies
The accounting policies set out below have been applied to all the periods presented in these ﬁnancial statements and have been applied consistently by the Group entities.
4.1. Basis of consolidation
The consolidated ﬁnancial statements incorporate the ﬁnancial statements of the Bank and entities controlled by the Bank (its subsidiaries) up to 31 December each year. Control is achieved when the Group:
• has the power over the investee;
• is exposed, or has rights, to variable returns from its involvement with the investee; and
• has the ability to use its power to a/uniFB00ect its returns. 
The Group reassesses whether or not it controls an investee if facts and circumstances indicate that there are changes to one or more of the three elements of control listed above. 
i. SubsidiariesThe subsidiaries are investees controlled by the Group. The ﬁnancial statements of the subsidiaries are included 
in the consolidated ﬁnancial statements from the date on which control commences until the date when control ceases. The ﬁnancial statements of the subsidiaries used to prepare the consolidated ﬁnancial statements were prepared as of the Bank’s reporting date. The subsidiaries’ ﬁnancial statements are prepared in accordance with Group accounting policies.
There were no non-controlling interests in subsidiaries.ii. Transactions eliminated on consolidationIntra Group balances and transactions and any unrealised income and expenses (except foreign currency Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
85transaction gains or losses) arising from intra Group transactions, are eliminated in preparing the consolidated 
ﬁnancial statements. Unrealised losses are eliminated in the same way as unrealised gains, but only to the extent that there is no evidence of impairment.
iii. Associates
Associates are all entities over which the Bank has signiﬁcant inﬂuence but no control, generally accompanying 
a shareholding of between 20% and 50% of voting rights. Investment in associates are accounted for using the equity method of accounting and are initially recognised at cost.
iv. Change in ownership interest in subsidiaries
A change in ownership interest in subsidiaries, without loss of control, is accounted for as an equity transaction. 
The carrying amount of the Group’s interests and any non-controlling interests are adjusted to reﬂect the changes in their relative interests in the subsidiaries. If the Group loses control over a subsidiary, it derecognises the assets and liabilities of the subsidiaries and any related non controlling interests and other components of equity. Any surplus or deﬁcit arising on the loss of control is recognised in proﬁt or loss. Any retained interest in the former subsidiaries is recognised at fair value at the date of loss of control. 
v. Separate ﬁnancial statementsIn the separate ﬁnancial statements, investments in subsidiaries and associates are accounted for at cost less 
impairment. Cost also includes direct attributable costs of investment. 
4.2. Foreign currency 
4.2.1. Foreign currency transactions
Transactions in foreign currencies (currencies other than the entity’s functional currency) are translated into the 
respective functional currency of the Group entities using exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the reporting date are translated to the 
functional currency at exchange rates ruling at that date. Non monetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are not retranslated.
Foreign currency di/uniFB00erences arising on retranslation are generally recognised in proﬁt or loss.Foreign exchange gains and losses arising from the translation of items recognised in other comprehensive 
income are presented in other comprehensive income.
4.2.2 Foreign operations
The assets and liabilities of foreign operations are translated into Ghana Cedis at the spot exchange rates at the reporting date. The income and expenses of foreign operations are translated into Ghana Cedis at the average exchange rates for the period. 
Foreign currency di/uniFB00erences arising on the translation are recognised in other comprehensive income and 
presented within equity.
When a foreign operation is disposed of, the cumulative amount in equity relating to that foreign operation is 
reclassiﬁed to proﬁt or loss as part of the gain or loss on disposal.
Exchange di/uniFB00erences are recognised in proﬁt or loss in the period in which they arise except for:
• exchange di/uniFB00erences on foreign currency borrowings relating to assets under construction for future 
productive use, which are included in the cost of those assets when they are regarded as an adjustment to interest costs on those foreign currency borrowings;Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
86• exchange di/uniFB00erences on transactions entered into to hedge certain foreign currency risks and
• exchange di/uniFB00erences on monetary items receivable from or payable to a foreign operation for which 
settlement is neither planned nor likely to occur in the foreseeable future (therefore forming part of the net investment in the foreign operation), which are recognised initially in other comprehensive income and reclassiﬁed from equity to proﬁt or loss on disposal or partial disposal of the net investment.
For the purpose of presenting consolidated ﬁnancial statements, the assets and liabilities of the Group’s foreign operations are translated at exchange rates prevailing on the reporting date. Income and expense items are translated at the average exchange rates for the period, unless exchange rates ﬂuctuate signiﬁcantly during that period, in which case the exchange rates at the date of transactions are used. Exchange di/uniFB00erences arising, if any, are recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in a foreign exchange translation reserve.
On the disposal of a foreign operation (i.e. a disposal of the Group’s entire interest in a foreign operation, or a 
disposal involving loss of control over a subsidiaries that includes a foreign operation or a partial disposal of an interest in a joint arrangement or an associate that includes a foreign operation of which the retained interest becomes a ﬁnancial asset), all of the exchange di/uniFB00erences accumulated in a foreign exchange translation reserve in respect of that operation attributable to the owners of the Company are reclassiﬁed to proﬁt or loss.
In addition, in relation to a partial disposal of subsidiaries that includes a foreign operation that does not result 
in the Group losing control over the subsidiaries, the proportionate share of accumulated exchange di/uniFB00erences are re-attributed to non-controlling interests and are not recognised in proﬁt or loss. For all other partial disposals (i.e. partial disposals of associates or joint arrangements that do not result in the Group losing signiﬁcant inﬂuence or joint control), the proportionate share of the accumulated exchange di/uniFB00erences is reclassiﬁed to proﬁt or loss. 
4.3. Revenue recognition 
The Group recognises revenue from the following major sources:
•  Interest income
• Fee and commission income 
• Net trading income 
Revenue is measured based on the consideration to which the Group expects to be entitled in a contract with a customer and excludes amounts collected on behalf of third parties. The Group recognises revenue when it transfers control of a product or service to a customer.
4.3.1 Recognition of interest income
The e/uniFB00ective interest rate method (EIR)
Under IFRS 9, interest income is recorded using the EIR method for all ﬁnancial assets measured at amortised 
cost, interest rate derivatives for which hedge accounting is applied and the related amortisation/recycling e/uniFB00ect of hedge accounting. Interest income on interest bearing ﬁnancial assets measured at FVTOCI under IFRS 9 is also recorded using the EIR method. Interest expense is also calculated using the EIR method for all ﬁnancial liabilities held at amortised cost. The EIR is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash receipts through the expected life of the ﬁnancial asset or liability or, when appropriate, a shorter period, to the gross carrying amount of the ﬁnancial asset.
The EIR (and therefore, the amortised cost of the ﬁnancial asset) is calculated by taking into account transaction 
costs and any discount or premium on the acquisition of the ﬁnancial asset, as well as fees and costs that are an integral part of the EIR. The Bank recognises interest income using a rate of return that represents the best estimate of a constant rate of return over the expected life of the loan. Hence, the EIR calculation also takes into Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
87account the e/uniFB00ect of potentially di/uniFB00erent interest rates that may be charged at various stages of the ﬁnancial 
asset’s expected life, and other characteristics of the product life cycle (including prepayments, penalty interest and charges).
Expectations of ﬁxed rate ﬁnancial assets’ or liabilities’ cash ﬂows are revised for reasons other than credit risk, 
and changes to future contractual cash ﬂows are discounted at the original EIR with a consequential adjustment to the carrying amount. The di/uniFB00erence from the previous carrying amount is booked as a positive or negative adjustment to the carrying amount of the ﬁnancial asset or liability on the statement of ﬁnancial position with a corresponding increase or decrease in interest revenue/expense calculated using the e/uniFB00ective interest method.
For ﬂoating-rate ﬁnancial instruments, periodic re-estimation of cash ﬂows to reﬂect the movements in the 
market rates of interest also alters the e/uniFB00ective interest rate, but when instruments were initially recognised at an amount equal to the principal, re-estimating the future interest payments does not signiﬁcantly a/uniFB00ect the carrying amount of the asset or the liability.
Interest and similar income/expenseNet interest income comprises interest income and interest expense calculated using both the e/uniFB00ective interest 
method and other methods. These are disclosed separately on the face of the income statement for both interest income and interest expense to provide symmetrical and comparable information.
Interest income/expense is calculated using the e/uniFB00ective interest method; the Group only includes interest on 
those ﬁnancial instruments that are set out in Note 4.4.
Interest income/expense on all trading ﬁnancial assets/liabilities is recognised as a part of the fair value change 
in ‘Net trading income’.
The Group calculates interest income on ﬁnancial assets, other than those considered credit-impaired, by 
applying the EIR to the gross carrying amount of the ﬁnancial asset. 
When a ﬁnancial asset becomes credit-impaired (as set out in Note 4.10) and is therefore regarded as ‘Stage 3’, 
the Group suspends interest that would have accrued had the group applied the EIR. If the ﬁnancial asset cures (as outlined in Note 4.10) and is no longer credit-impaired, the Bank releases suspended interest into interest income.
For purchased or originated credit-impaired (POCI) ﬁnancial assets (as set out in Note 4.10), the Group calculates 
interest income by calculating the credit-adjusted EIR and applying that rate to the amortised cost of the ﬁnancial asset. The credit-adjusted EIR is the interest rate that, at initial recognition, discounts the estimated future cash ﬂows (including credit losses) to the amortised cost of the POCI ﬁnancial asset.
4.3.2 Fee and commission income and expense
Fee and commission income and expense include fees other than those that are an integral part of EIR. The fees included in this part of the Group’s consolidated statement of proﬁt or loss include among other things fees charged for servicing a loan, non utilisation fees relating to loan commitments when it is unlikely that these will result in a speciﬁc lending arrangement and loan syndication fees.
Other fees and commission income and expenses are recognised on an accrual basis when the related services 
are performed. Loan commitment fees for loans that are not likely to be drawn down are deferred, together with related direct costs and recognised on a straight-line basis over the commitment period.
Other fees and commission expenses, which relate mainly to transaction and service fees are expensed as the 
related services are performed.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
884.3.3 Net trading income
Net trading income comprises gains less losses related to foreign exchange di/uniFB00erences on foreign currency deal 
transactions as well as all realised and unrealised fair value changes related to held-for-trading investment securities. The Group has elected to present the full fair value movement of trading assets and liabilities in trading income, including any related expense.
4.4. Financial instruments 
4.4.1 Initial recognition4.4.1.1 Date of recognition
Financial assets and liabilities, with the exception of loans and advances to customers and balances due to 
customers, are initially recognised on the trade date, i.e., the date on which the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument. This includes regular way trades, i.e., purchases or sales of ﬁnancial assets that require delivery of assets within the time frame generally established by regulation or convention in the marketplace. Loans and advances to customers are recognised when funds are transferred to customers’ accounts. The Group recognises balances due to customers when funds are deposited with the Group.
4.4.1.2 Initial measurement of ﬁnancial instruments
The classiﬁcation of ﬁnancial instruments at initial recognition depends on their contractual terms and the business model for managing the instruments, as described in Notes 4.7. Financial instruments are initially measured at their fair value (as deﬁned in Note 4.6), except in the case of ﬁnancial assets and ﬁnancial liabilities recorded at FVTPL, in which case, transaction costs are added to, or subtracted from, this amount. Trade receivables are measured at the transaction price. When the fair value of ﬁnancial instruments at initial recognition di/uniFB00ers from the transaction price, the Group accounts for the Day 1 proﬁt or loss, as described below.
4.4.1.3 Day 1 proﬁt or loss
When the transaction price of the instrument di/uniFB00ers from the fair value at origination and the fair value is based on a valuation technique using only inputs observable in market transactions, the Group recognises the di/uniFB00erence between the transaction price and fair value in net trading income. In those cases where fair value is based on models for which some of the inputs are not observable, the di/uniFB00erence between the transaction price and the fair value is deferred and is only recognised in proﬁt or loss when the inputs become observable, or when the instrument is derecognised.
4.5 Measurement categories of ﬁnancial assets and liabilities
The Group classiﬁes all of its ﬁnancial assets based on the business model for managing the assets and the asset’s contractual terms (as explained in 4.7), measured at either:
• Amortised cost
• Fair value through other comprehensive income (FVTOCI)
• Fair value through proﬁt and loss (FVTPL)
4.5.1 Initial recognition
The Group classiﬁes and measures its derivative and trading portfolio at FVTPL, as explained in Notes 4.7.2 and 4.7.3. The Group may designate ﬁnancial instruments at FVTPL, if doing so eliminates or signiﬁcantly reduces measurement or recognition inconsistencies. Financial liabilities, other than loan commitments and ﬁnancial guarantees, are measured at amortised cost or at FVTPL when they are held for trading.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
894.6 Determination of fair value
In order to show how fair values have been derived, ﬁnancial instruments are classiﬁed based on a hierarchy of 
valuation techniques, as summarised below:
• Level 1 ﬁnancial instruments − These are where the inputs used in the valuation are unadjusted quoted prices from active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the Group has access to at the measurement date. The Group considers markets as active only if there are su/uniFB03cient trading activities with regards to the volume and liquidity of the identical assets or liabilities and when there are binding and exercisable price quotes available on the balance sheet date.  Details of ﬁnancial instruments revalued under level 1 are shown at Note 24a 
• Level 2 ﬁnancial instruments − These are where the inputs that are used for valuation are signiﬁcant and are derived from directly or indirectly observable market data available over the entire period of the instrument’s life. Such inputs include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical instruments in inactive markets and observable inputs other than quoted prices such as interest rates and yield curves, implied volatilities, and credit spreads. In addition, adjustments may be required for the condition or location of the asset or the extent to which it relates to items that are comparable to the valued instrument. However, if such adjustments are based on unobservable inputs which are signiﬁcant to the entire measurement, the Group will classify the instruments as Level 3. No instrument was valued under this category.
• Level 3 ﬁnancial instruments − These include one or more unobservable input that is signiﬁcant to the measurement as a whole. The Group periodically reviews its valuation techniques including the adopted methodologies and model calibrations. However, the base models may not fully capture all factors relevant to the valuation of the Bank’s ﬁnancial instruments such as credit risk (CVA), own credit (DVA) and/or funding costs (FVA). Therefore the Bank applies various techniques to estimate the credit risk associated with its ﬁnancial instruments measured at fair value, which include, a portfolio-based approach that estimates the expected net exposure per counterparty over the full lifetime of the individual assets, in order to reﬂect the credit risk of the individual counterparties for non-collateralised ﬁnancial instruments. The Bank estimates the value of its own credit from market observable data, such as secondary prices for its traded debt and the credit spread on credit default swaps and traded debts on itself. Details of ﬁnancial instruments revalued under level 3 are shown at Note 24b
The Bank evaluates the levelling at each reporting period on an instrument-by-instrument basis and reclassiﬁes instruments when necessary, based on the facts at the end of the reporting period.
4.7 Financial assets and liabilities
4.7.1 Advances to banks, Loans and advances to customers, Financial investments at amortised 
cost
The Group measures advances to banks, loans and advances to customers and other ﬁnancial investments at 
amortised cost only if both of the following conditions are met:
• The ﬁnancial asset is held within a business model with the objective to hold ﬁnancial assets in order to collect contractual cash ﬂows
• The contractual terms of the ﬁnancial asset give rise on speciﬁed dates to cash ﬂows that are solely payments of principal and interest (SPPI) on the principal amount outstanding.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
90The details of these conditions are outlined below:
4.7.1.1 Business model assessment
The Group determines its business model at the level that best reﬂects how it manages groups of ﬁnancial 
assets to achieve its business objective:
• The risks that a/uniFB00ect the performance of the business model (and the ﬁnancial assets held within that business model) and, in particular, the way those risks are managed;
• How managers of the business are compensated (for example, whether the compensation is based on the fair value of the assets managed or on the contractual cash ﬂows collected).
The expected frequency, value and timing of sales are also important aspects of the Group’s assessment. The business model assessment is based on reasonably expected scenarios without taking ‘worst case’ or ‘stress case’ scenarios into account. If cash ﬂows after initial recognition are realised in a way that is di/uniFB00erent from the Group’s original expectations, the Group does not change the classiﬁcation of the remaining ﬁnancial assets held in that business model, but incorporates such information when assessing newly originated or newly purchased ﬁnancial assets going forward.
4.7.1.2 The SPPI test 
As a second step of its classiﬁcation process, the Group assesses the contractual terms of the ﬁnancial asset to identify whether they meet the SPPI test. ‘Principal’ for the purpose of this test is deﬁned as the fair value of the ﬁnancial asset at initial recognition and may change over the life of the ﬁnancial asset (for example, if there are repayments of principal or amortisation of the premium/discount).The most signiﬁcant elements of interest within a lending arrangement are typically the consideration for the time value of money and credit risk. To make the SPPI assessment, the Group applies judgement and considers relevant factors such as the currency in which the ﬁnancial asset is denominated, and the period for which the interest rate is set.
In contrast, contractual terms that introduce a more than de minimis exposure to risks or volatility in the 
contractual cash ﬂows that are unrelated to a basic lending arrangement do not give rise to contractual cash ﬂows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the amount outstanding. In such cases, the ﬁnancial asset is required to be measured at FVTPL.
4.7.2 Financial assets or ﬁnancial liabilities held for trading
The Group classiﬁes ﬁnancial assets or ﬁnancial liabilities as held for trading when they have been purchased or issued primarily for short-term proﬁt-making through trading activities or form part of a portfolio of ﬁnancial instruments that are managed together, for which there is evidence of a recent pattern of short-term proﬁt taking. Held-for-trading assets and liabilities are recorded and measured in the statement of ﬁnancial position at fair value. Changes in fair value are recognised in net trading income. Interest  income or expense is recorded in net trading income according to the terms of the contract, or when the right to payment has been established.
Included in this classiﬁcation are debt securities, equities, short positions and customer loans that have been 
acquired principally for the purpose of selling or repurchasing in the near term.
4.7.3 Debt instruments at FVTOCI
The Group classiﬁes debt instruments at FVTOCI when both of the following conditions are met:
• The instrument is held within a business model, the objective of which is achieved by both collecting contractual cash ﬂows and selling ﬁnancial assets; and
• The contractual terms of the ﬁnancial asset meet the SPPI test.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
91FVTOCI debt instruments are subsequently measured at fair value with gains and losses arising due to changes 
in fair value recognised in OCI. Interest income and foreign exchange gains and losses are recognised in proﬁt or loss in the same manner as for ﬁnancial assets measured at amortised cost as explained in Note 4.3.1. The ECL calculation for Debt instruments at FVTOCI is explained in Note 4.10.1. Where the Bank holds more than one investment in the same security, they are deemed to be disposed o/uniFB00 on a ﬁrst–in ﬁrst–out basis. On derecognition, cumulative gains or losses previously recognised in OCI are reclassiﬁed from OCI to proﬁt or loss.
4.7.5 Equity instruments at FVTOCI
Upon initial recognition, the Bank occasionally elects to classify irrevocably some of its equity investments as equity instruments at FVTOCI when they meet the deﬁnition of Equity under IAS 32 Financial Instruments: Presentation and are not held for trading. Such classiﬁcation is determined on an instrument by instrument basis.
Gains and losses on these equity instruments are never recycled to proﬁt. Dividends are recognised in proﬁt or 
loss as other operating income when the right of the payment has been established, except when the Group beneﬁts from such proceeds as a recovery of part of the cost of the instrument, in which case, such gains are recorded in OCI. Equity instruments at FVTOCI are not subject to an impairment assessment.
4.7.6 Financial assets and ﬁnancial liabilities at fair value through proﬁt or loss
Financial assets and ﬁnancial liabilities in this category are those that are not held for trading and have been either designated by management upon initial recognition or are mandatorily required to be measured at fair value under IFRS 9. Management only designates an instrument at FVTPL upon initial recognition when one of the following criteria are met. Such designation is determined on an instrument-by-instrument basis:
• The designation eliminates, or signiﬁcantly reduces, the inconsistent treatment that would otherwise arise from measuring the assets or liabilities or recognising gains or losses on them on a di/uniFB00erent basis
Or
• The liabilities are part of a group of ﬁnancial liabilities, which are managed and their performance evaluated on a fair value basis, in accordance with a documented risk management or investment strategy
Or
• The liabilities contain one or more embedded derivatives, unless they do not signiﬁcantly modify the cash ﬂows that would otherwise be required by the contract, or it is clear with little or no analysis when a similar instrument is ﬁrst considered that separation of the embedded derivative(s) is prohibited.
Financial assets and ﬁnancial liabilities at FVTPL are recorded in the statement of ﬁnancial position at fair value. Changes in fair value are recorded in proﬁt and loss with the exception of movements in fair value of liabilities designated at FVTPL due to changes in the Group’s own credit risk. Such changes in fair value are recorded in the Own Credit Reserve through OCI and do not get recycled to the proﬁt or loss. Interest earned or incurred on instruments designated at FVTPL is accrued in interest income or interest expense, respectively, using the EIR, taking into account any discount/ premium and qualifying transaction costs being an integral part of instrument. Interest earned on assets mandatorily required to be measured at FVTPL is recorded using the contractual interest rate, as explained in Note 4.3.1. Dividend income from equity instruments measured at FVTPL is recorded in proﬁt or loss as other operating income when the right to the payment has been established.
4.7.7 Financial guarantees, letters of credit and undrawn loan commitments
The Group issues ﬁnancial guarantees, letters of credit and loan commitments.
Financial guarantees are initially recognised in the ﬁnancial statements (within Provisions) at fair value, being 
the premium received. Subsequent to initial recognition, the Group’s liability under each guarantee is measured Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
92at the higher of the amount initially recognised less cumulative amortisation recognised in the income statement 
and an ECL allowance.
The premium received is recognised in the income statement in Net fees and commission income on a straight-
line basis over the life of the guarantee.
Undrawn loan commitments and letters of credits are commitments under which over the duration of the 
commitment, the Bank is required to provide a loan with pre-speciﬁed terms to the customer. Similar to ﬁnancial guarantee contracts, these contracts are in the scope of the ECL requirements.
The nominal contractual value of ﬁnancial guarantees, letters of credit and undrawn loan commitments, where 
the loan agreed to be provided is on market terms, are not recorded in the statement of ﬁnancial position. 
The Group occasionally issues loan commitments at below market interest rates. Such commitments are 
subsequently measured at the higher of the amount of the ECL allowance (as explained in Note 4.10.1) and the amount initially recognised less, when appropriate, the cumulative amount of income recognised as outlined in Note 11.
4.8 Reclassiﬁcation of ﬁnancial assets and liabilities
The Group does not reclassify its ﬁnancial assets subsequent to their initial recognition, apart from the exceptional circumstances in which the Group acquires, disposes of, or terminates a business line. Financial liabilities are never reclassiﬁed.
4.9 Derecognition of ﬁnancial assets and liabilities
4.9.1 Derecognition due to substantial modiﬁcation of terms and conditions
The Group derecognises a ﬁnancial asset, such as a loan to a customer, when the terms and conditions have 
been renegotiated to the extent that, substantially, it becomes a new loan, with the di/uniFB00erence recognised as a derecognition gain or loss, to the extent that an impairment loss has not already been recorded. The newly recognised loans are classiﬁed as Stage 1 for ECL measurement purposes, unless the new loan is deemed to be POCI.
When assessing whether or not to derecognise a loan to a customer, amongst others, the Group considers the 
following factors:
• Change in currency of the loan
• Introduction of an equity feature
• Change in counterparty
• If the modiﬁcation is such that the instrument would no longer meet the SPPI criterion
If the modiﬁcation does not result in cash ﬂows that are substantially di/uniFB00erent, as set out below, the modiﬁcation does not result in de-recognition. Based on the change in cash ﬂows discounted at the original EIR, the Group records a modiﬁcation gain or loss, to the extent that an impairment loss has not already been recorded. For ﬁnancial liabilities, the Group considers a modiﬁcation substantial based on qualitative factors and if it results in a di/uniFB00erence between the adjusted discounted present value and the original carrying amount of the ﬁnancial liability of, or greater than, ten percent. For ﬁnancial assets, this assessment is based on qualitative factors.
Modiﬁcation Assessment of Government of Ghana Bonds
The Bank used the principles of IFRS 9 to assess for modiﬁcation where the contractual terms of debt instruments are modiﬁed, an assessment is performed to ascertain if the new terms are “substantially di/uniFB00erent” from the old terms i.e., if the modiﬁcation is signiﬁcant or not.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
93IFRS 9 states that in some circumstances the renegotiation or modiﬁcation of the contractual cash ﬂows of a 
ﬁnancial asset can lead to its derecognition although there is no explicit guidance on when a modiﬁcation of a ﬁnancial asset leads to a derecognition.
In assessing whether there is a substantial modiﬁcation the bank may, but is not required to, analogise to the 
guidance on the derecognition of ﬁnancial liabilities (IFRIC updates, May 2012, and September 2012).
The IFRS9.3.3.2 paragraph regarding derecognition of ﬁnancial liabilities from which the analogy is drawn states 
that, an exchange between an existing borrower and lender of debt instruments with substantially di/uniFB00erent terms or a substantial modiﬁcation of the terms of an existing ﬁnancial liability shall be accounted for as an extinguishment of the original ﬁnancial liability 
The Bank assessed the ﬁnancial assets and applied its analogy to assess the exchange of the old bonds for the 
new bonds to be acquired under the Debt Exchange program, will result in a substantial modiﬁcation due to the following: 
 –A holder of a single bond or a holder of portfolio of bonds will receive, in exchange for the old bond or portfolio of old bonds, twelve bonds with di/uniFB00erent maturities and cash ﬂow proﬁles in accordance with the terms and conditions of the GDDE program.
 –All of the bondholders are to receive the same restructuring deal irrespective of the terms and conditions of their individual holdings. This indicates that the individual instruments, terms and conditions were not taken into account. The di/uniFB00erent bonds (series) were not each modiﬁed in contemplation of their respective terms and conditions but were instead replaced by a new uniform debt structure; and
 –The terms and conditions of the new bonds are substantially di/uniFB00erent from those of the old bonds. The changes include many di/uniFB00erent aspects, such as signiﬁcant extension of the maturity date of the bonds and reduction of the coupon rates.
Consequently, the Bank will derecognize the old bonds, and a new asset recognised for the new bonds.
When the modiﬁcation of a ﬁnancial asset results in the derecognition of the existing ﬁnancial asset and the 
subsequent recognition of the modiﬁed ﬁnancial asset, the modiﬁed asset is considered a ‘new’ ﬁnancial asset [IFRS 9 paragraph B5.5.25] . Accordingly, the date of the modiﬁcation is treated as the date of initial recognition 
of that ﬁnancial asset when applying the impairment requirements to the modiﬁed ﬁnancial asset. This typically means measuring the loss allowance at an amount equal to 12-month expected credit losses until there is a signiﬁcant increase in credit risk. 
However, in some unusual circumstances following a modiﬁcation that results in derecognition of the original 
ﬁnancial asset, there may be evidence that the modiﬁed ﬁnancial asset is credit-impaired at initial recognition, and thus, the ﬁnancial asset should be recognised as an originated credit-impaired ﬁnancial asset [IFRS 9 
paragraph B5.5.26] .
4.9.2 De-recognition other than for substantial modiﬁcation
4.9.2.1 Financial assets
A ﬁnancial asset (or, where applicable, a part of a ﬁnancial asset or part of a group of similar ﬁnancial assets) is 
derecognised when the rights to receive cash ﬂows from the ﬁnancial asset have expired. The Group also derecognises the ﬁnancial asset if it has both transferred the ﬁnancial asset and the transfer qualiﬁes for de-recognition.
The Group has transferred the ﬁnancial asset if, and only if, either:
• The Group has transferred its contractual rights to receive cash ﬂows from the ﬁnancial asset
OrNotes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
94• It retains the rights to the cash ﬂows but has assumed an obligation to pay the received cash ﬂows in full 
without material delay to a third party under a ‘pass–through’ arrangement.
4.9.2 De-recognition other than for substantial modiﬁcation
4.9.2.1 Financial assets
Pass-through arrangements are transactions whereby the Group retains the contractual rights to receive the 
cash ﬂows of a ﬁnancial asset (the ‘original asset’), but assumes a contractual obligation to pay those cash ﬂows to one or more entities (the ‘eventual recipients’), when all of the following three conditions are met:
• The Group has no obligation to pay amounts to the eventual recipients unless it has collected equivalent amounts from the original asset, excluding short-term advances with the right to full recovery of the amount lent plus accrued interest at market rates;
• The Group cannot sell or pledge the original asset other than as security to the eventual recipients; and
• The Group has to remit any cash ﬂows it collects on behalf of the eventual recipients without material delay. In addition, the Bank is not entitled to reinvest such cash ﬂows, except for investments in cash or cash equivalents, including interest earned, during the period between the collection date and the date of required remittance to the eventual recipients.
A transfer only qualiﬁes for derecognition if either:
• The Group has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset
Or
• The Group has neither transferred nor retained substantially all the risks and rewards of the asset but has transferred control of the asset.
The Group considers control to be transferred if and only if, the transferee has the practical ability to sell the asset in its entirety to an unrelated third party and is able to exercise that ability unilaterally and without imposing additional restrictions on the transfer.
When the Group has neither transferred nor retained substantially all the risks and rewards and has retained 
control of the asset, the asset continues to be recognised only to the extent of the Group’s continuing involvement, in which case, the Group also recognises an associated liability. The transferred asset and the associated liability are measured on a basis that reﬂects the rights and obligations that the Group has retained.
Continuing involvement that takes the form of a guarantee over the transferred asset is measured at the lower 
of the original carrying amount of the asset and the maximum amount of consideration the Group could be required to pay.
If continuing involvement takes the form of a written or purchased option (or both) on the transferred asset, the 
continuing involvement is measured at the value the Group would be required to pay upon repurchase. In the case of a written put option on an asset that is measured at fair value, the extent of the entity’s continuing involvement is limited to the lower of the fair value of the transferred asset and the option exercise price.
4.9.2.2 Financial liabilities
A ﬁnancial liability is derecognised when the obligation under the liability is discharged, cancelled or expires. Where an existing ﬁnancial liability is replaced by another from the same lender on substantially di/uniFB00erent terms, or the terms of an existing liability are substantially modiﬁed, such an exchange or modiﬁcation is treated as a de-recognition of the original liability and the recognition of a new liability. The di/uniFB00erence between the carrying value of the original ﬁnancial liability and the consideration paid is recognised in proﬁt or loss.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
954.10 Overview of the ECL principles
The Group records an allowance for expected credit loss for all loans and other debt ﬁnancial assets not held at 
FVTPL, together with loan commitments and ﬁnancial guarantee contracts, in this section all referred to as ‘ﬁnancial instruments’. Equity instruments are not subject to impairment under IFRS 9.
The ECL allowance is based on the credit losses expected to arise over the life of the asset (the lifetime expected 
credit losses or LTECL), unless there has been no signiﬁcant increase in credit risk since origination, in which case, the allowance is based on the 12 months’ expected credit losses (12m ECL) as outlined in Note 4.10.1). The Group’s policies for determining if there has been a signiﬁcant increase in credit risk are set out in Note 6.
The 12-month ECL is the portion of LTECLs that represent the ECL that result from default events on a ﬁnancial 
instrument that are possible within the 12 months after the reporting date.
Both LTECL and 12 months ECL are calculated on either an individual basis or a collective basis, depending on 
the nature of the underlying portfolio of ﬁnancial instruments. The Bank’s policy for grouping ﬁnancial assets measured on a collective basis is explained in Note 6.
The Group has established a policy to perform an assessment, at the end of each reporting period, of whether 
a ﬁnancial instrument’s credit risk has increased signiﬁcantly since initial recognition, by considering the change in the risk of default occurring over the remaining life of the ﬁnancial instrument. This is further explained in Note 6.
Based on the above process, the Group bands its loans into Stage 1, Stage 2, Stage 3 and POCI, as described 
below:
• Stage 1: When loans are ﬁrst recognised, the Bank recognises an allowance based on 12months ECL. Stage 1 loans also include facilities where the credit risk has improved, and the loan has been reclassiﬁed from Stage 2.
• Stage 2: When a loan has shown a signiﬁcant increase in credit risk since origination, the Bank records an allowance for the LTECL. Stage 2 loans also include facilities, where the credit risk has improved, and the loan has been reclassiﬁed from Stage 3.
• Stage 3: Loans considered credit-impaired (as outlined in Note 6.) The Group records an allowance for the LTECL.
• POCI: Purchased or originated credit impaired (POCI) assets are ﬁnancial assets that are credit impaired on initial recognition. POCI assets are recorded at fair value at original recognition and interest income is subsequently recognised based on a credit-adjusted EIR. The ECL allowance is only recognised or released to the extent that there is a subsequent change in the expected credit losses.
For ﬁnancial assets for which the Bank has no reasonable expectations of recovering either the entire outstanding amount, or a proportion thereof, the gross carrying amount of the ﬁnancial asset is reduced. This is considered a (partial) derecognition of the ﬁnancial asset.
4.10.1 The calculation of ECL
The Group calculates ECL based on a three probability-weighted scenarios to measure the expected cash shortfalls, discounted at an approximation to the EIR. A cash shortfall is the di/uniFB00erence between the cash ﬂows that are due to an entity in accordance with the contract and the cash ﬂows that the entity expects to receive.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
96The mechanics of the ECL calculations are outlined below and the key elements are, as follows:
• PD The Probability of Default is an estimate of the likelihood of default over a given time horizon. A 
default may only happen at a certain time over the assessed period, if the facility has not been 
previously derecognised and is still in the portfolio. The concept of PD is further explained in Note 6.
• EAD  The Exposure at Default is an estimate of the exposure at a future default date, taking into account 
expected changes in the exposure after the reporting date, including repayments of principal and interest, whether scheduled by contract or otherwise, expected drawdowns on committed facilities, and accrued interest from missed payments. The EAD is further explained in Note 6.
• LGD The Loss Given Default is an estimate of the loss arising in the case where a default occurs at a 
given time. It is based on the di/uniFB00erence between the contractual cash ﬂows due and those that the lender would expect to receive, including from the realisation of any collateral or credit enhancements that are integral to the loan and not required to be recognised separately, as set out in Note 4.4(vii). It is usually expressed as a percentage of the EAD. The LGD is further explained in Note 6.
4.10.1 The calculation of ECL
When estimating the ECL, the Bank considers three scenarios (a base case, an upside, and a downside). Each of these is associated with di/uniFB00erent PDs, EADs and LGDs. When relevant, the assessment of multiple scenarios also incorporates how defaulted loans are expected to be recovered, including the probability that the loans will cure and the value of collateral or the amount that might be received for selling the asset.
With the exception of other revolving facilities, for which the treatment is separately set out below, the maximum 
period for which the credit losses are determined is the contractual life of a ﬁnancial instrument unless the Bank has the legal right to call it earlier.
Impairment losses and releases are accounted for and disclosed separately from modiﬁcation losses or gains 
that are accounted for as an adjustment of the ﬁnancial asset’s gross carrying value.
Provisions for ECL for undrawn loan commitments are assessed. The calculation of ECL (including the ECL 
related to the undrawn element) of revolving facilities is explained below.
The mechanics of the ECL method are summarised below:
• Stage 1: The 12-month ECL is calculated as the portion of LTECL that represent the ECL that result from 
default events on a ﬁnancial instrument that are possible within the 12 months after the reporting 
date. The Bank calculates the 12-month ECL allowance based on the expectation of a default occurring in the 12 months following the reporting date. These expected 12-month default probabilities are applied to a forecast EAD and multiplied by the expected LGD and discounted by an approximation to the original EIR. This calculation is made for each of the three scenarios, as explained above.
• Stage 2: When a loan has shown a signiﬁcant increase in credit risk since origination, the Bank records an 
allowance for the LTECL. The mechanics are similar to those explained above, including the use of multiple scenarios, but PDs and LGDs are estimated over the lifetime of the instrument. The expected cash shortfalls are discounted by an approximation to the original EIR.
• Stage 3: For loans considered credit-impaired (as deﬁned in Note 6), the Bank recognises the lifetime 
expected credit losses for these loans. The method is similar to that for Stage 2 assets, with the PD set at 100%.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
97• POCI: POCI assets are ﬁnancial assets that are credit impaired on initial recognition. The Bank only 
recognises the cumulative changes in lifetime ECL since initial recognition, based on a probability-
weighting of the three scenarios, discounted by the credit adjusted EIR.
• Loan commitment and letters of credit: When estimating LTECL for undrawn loan commitments, the Bank estimates the expected portion of the loan commitment that will be drawn down over its expected life. The ECL is then based on the present value of the expected shortfalls in cash ﬂows if the loan is drawn down, based on a probability-weighting of the four scenarios. The expected cash shortfalls are discounted at an approximation to the expected EIR on the loan.
• For revolving facilities that include both a loan and an undrawn commitment, ECL is calculated and presented together with the loan. For loan commitments and letters of credit, the ECL is also recognised together with the loan.
• Financial guarantee contracts: The Bank’s liability under each guarantee is measured at the higher of the amount initially recognised less cumulative amortisation recognised in the income statement, and the ECL provision. For this purpose, the Bank estimates ECL based on the present value of the expected payments to reimburse the holder for a credit loss that it incurs. The shortfalls are discounted by the risk-adjusted interest rate relevant to the exposure. The calculation is made using a probability-weighting of the four scenarios. The ECL related to ﬁnancial guarantee contracts are recognised within the loan.
4.10.2 Debt instruments measured at fair value through OCI
The ECL for debt instruments measured at FVTOCI do not reduce the carrying amount of these ﬁnancial assets in the statement of ﬁnancial position, which remains at fair value. Instead, an amount equal to the allowance that would arise if the assets were measured at amortised cost is recognised in OCI as an accumulated impairment amount, with a corresponding charge to proﬁt or loss. The accumulated loss recognised in OCI is recycled to the proﬁt and loss upon de-recognition of the assets.
4.10.3 Purchased or originated credit impaired ﬁnancial assets (POCI)
For POCI ﬁnancial assets, the Bank only recognises the cumulative changes in LTECL since initial recognition in the loss allowance.
4.10.4 Forward looking information
In its ECL models, the Group relies on a broad range of forward-looking information as economic inputs, such as:
• GDP growth
• Unemployment rates
• Central Bank base rates
The inputs and models used for calculating ECL may not always capture all characteristics of the market at the date of the ﬁnancial statements. To reﬂect this, qualitative adjustments or overlays are occasionally made as temporary adjustments when such di/uniFB00erences are signiﬁcantly material. Detailed information about these inputs and sensitivity analysis are provided in Note 6.
4.11 Credit enhancements: collateral valuation and ﬁnancial guarantees
To mitigate its credit risks on ﬁnancial assets, the Group seeks to use collateral, where possible. The collateral comes in various forms, such as cash, securities, letters of credit/guarantees, real estate, receivables, inventories, other non-ﬁnancial assets and credit enhancements such as netting agreements. Collateral, unless repossessed, is not recorded on the Group’s statement of ﬁnancial position.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
98Cash ﬂows expected from credit enhancements which are not required to be recognised separately by IFRS and 
which are considered integral to the contractual terms of a debt instrument which is subject to ECL, are included in the measurement of those ECL. On this basis, the fair value of collateral a/uniFB00ects the calculation of ECL. Collateral is generally assessed, at a minimum, at inception and re-assessed on a quarterly basis. However, some collateral, for example, cash or securities relating to margining requirements, is valued daily. 
To the extent possible, the Group uses active market data for valuing ﬁnancial assets held as collateral. Other 
ﬁnancial assets which do not have readily determinable market values are valued using models. Non-ﬁnancial collateral, such as real estate, is valued based on data provided by third parties such as mortgage brokers or based on housing price indices.
Guarantees held are included in the measurement of loan ECLs when either they are speciﬁed in the contractual 
terms of the loan or else are integral to the loan, in that they formed part of the basis on which the loan was extended. 
Guarantees that are not integral to the loan’s contractual terms are accounted as separate units of accounts 
subject to ECL. 
4.12 Collateral repossessed
The Group’s policy is to determine whether a repossessed asset can be best used for its internal operations or should be sold. Assets determined to be useful for the internal operations are transferred to their relevant asset category at the lower of their repossessed value or the carrying value of the original secured asset. Assets for which selling is determined to be a better option are transferred to assets held for sale at their fair value (if ﬁnancial assets) and fair value less cost to sell for non-ﬁnancial assets at the repossession date, in line with the Group’s policy.
In its normal course of business, the Group engages external agents to recover funds from the repossessed 
assets, generally at auction, to settle outstanding debt. Any surplus funds are returned to the customers/obligors. As a result of this practice, the residential properties under legal repossession processes are not recorded on the balance sheet.
4.13  Write-o/uniFB00s
Financial assets are written o/uniFB00 either partially or in their entirety only when the Group has no reasonable expectation of recovering a ﬁnancial asset in its entirety or a portion thereof. If the amount to be written o/uniFB00 is greater than the accumulated loss allowance, the di/uniFB00erence is ﬁrst treated as an addition to the allowance that is then applied against the gross carrying amount. Any subsequent recoveries are credited to credit loss expense.
4.14 Forborne and modiﬁed loans
The Group sometimes makes concessions or modiﬁcations to the original terms of loans as a response to the borrower’s ﬁnancial di/uniFB03culties, rather than taking possession or to otherwise enforce collection of collateral. The Group considers a loan forborne when such concessions or modiﬁcations are provided as a result of the borrower’s present or expected ﬁnancial di/uniFB03culties and the Group would not have agreed to them if the borrower had been ﬁnancially healthy. Indicators of ﬁnancial di/uniFB03culties include defaults on covenants, or signiﬁcant concerns raised by the Credit Risk Department. Forbearance may involve extending the payment arrangements and the agreement of new loan conditions. Once the terms have been renegotiated, any impairment is measured using the original EIR as calculated before the modiﬁcation of terms. It is the Group’s policy to monitor forborne loans to help ensure that future payments continue to be likely to occur. De-recognition decisions and classiﬁcation between Stage 2 and Stage 3 are determined on a case-by-case basis. Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
99If these procedures identify a loss in relation to a loan, it is disclosed and managed as an impaired Stage 3 
forborne asset until it is collected or written o/uniFB00.
When the loan has been renegotiated or modiﬁed but not derecognised, the Group also reassesses whether 
there has been a signiﬁcant increase in credit risk, as set out in Note 6. The Group also considers whether the assets should be classiﬁed as Stage 3. In order for the loan to be reclassiﬁed out of the forborne category, the customer has to meet all of the following criteria:
• All of its facilities have to be considered performing
• The probation period of six months has passed from the date the forborne contract was considered performing
• Regular payments of more than an insigniﬁcant amount of principal or interest have been made during six months probation period
• The customer does not have any contracts that are more than 30 days past due.
• If modiﬁcations are substantial, the loan is derecognised, as explained in Note 4.9.1.
Impairment of Government of Ghana Bonds
Per Appendix A of IFRS 9, an asset is credit-impaired if one or more events have occurred that have a detrimental impact on the estimated future cash ﬂows of the asset. The following are examples of such events:
• signiﬁcant ﬁnancial di/uniFB03culty of the issuer or the borrower.
• a breach of contract - e.g., a default or past-due event.
• a lender having granted a concession to the borrower - for economic or contractual reasons relating to the borrower’s ﬁnancial di/uniFB03culty - that the lender would not otherwise consider
• is becoming probable that the borrower will enter bankruptcy or other ﬁnancial reorganisation.
• the disappearance of an active market for that ﬁnancial asset because of ﬁnancial di/uniFB03culties; or
• the purchase of a ﬁnancial asset at a deep discount that reﬂects the incurred credit losses
The assessments of the factors above led to the conclusion that the new bonds should be classiﬁed as originated credit impaired. 
Initial recognition of originated credit-impaired assets
On initial recognition, originated credit-impaired assets do not carry an impairment allowance. Instead, lifetime ECLs are incorporated into the calculation of the e/uniFB00ective interest rate [IFRS 9 paragraphs 5.5.13, A and B5.4.7] . 
This require the bank to determine the cash shortfalls or the expected cash ﬂows under the new terms in calculating the e/uniFB00ective interest rate of the new bonds at initial recognition.
Subsequent measurement of originated credit-impaired assets
The ECLs for originated credit-impaired assets are always measured at an amount equal to lifetime ECLs. However, the amount recognised as a loss allowance for these assets is not the total amount of lifetime ECLs, but instead the changes in lifetime ECLs since initial recognition of the asset [IFRS 9 paragraphs 5.5.13 and 
5.5.14] . No impairment expense or allowance is recognised if, in subsequent periods, experience and expectations 
about the collectability of cash ﬂows are unchanged from expectations on initial recognition.
Favourable changes in lifetime ECLs are recognised as an impairment gain, even if the favourable changes are 
more than the amount, if any, previously recognised in proﬁt or loss as impairment losses. Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
100If the Government can secure IMF Management and Executive Board Approval for an IMF program and the 
creditworthiness of the Government improves, the bank will revise the assessment of the expected cashﬂows from the new bonds and record an impairment gain.
Refer to Note 26 for details of the impairment assessment on the government of Ghana Bonds.
4.15  Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents in the Group statement of ﬁnancial position and cash ﬂow statement include notes 
and coins on hand, balances held with Bank of Ghana, other bank balances and highly liquid ﬁnancial assets with original maturities of three months or less from the date of acquisition that are subject to an insigniﬁcant risk of changes in their fair value and are used by the Group in the management of its short-term commitments.
4.16 Repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase at a speciﬁed future date are not derecognised from the statement of ﬁnancial position as the Group retains substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership. The corresponding cash received is recognised in the consolidated statement of ﬁnancial position as an asset with a corresponding obligation to return it, including accrued interest as a liability within cash collateral on securities lent and repurchase agreements, reﬂecting the transaction’s economic substance as a loan to the Group. The di/uniFB00erence between the sale and repurchase prices is treated as interest expense and is accrued over the life of agreement using the EIR. When the counterparty has the right to sell or re-pledge the securities, the Group reclassiﬁes those securities in its statement of ﬁnancial position to ﬁnancial assets held for trading pledged as collateral or to ﬁnancial investments available-for-sale pledged as collateral, as appropriate.
Conversely, securities purchased under agreements to resell at a speciﬁed future date are not recognised in the 
statement of ﬁnancial position. The consideration paid, including accrued interest, is recorded in the statement of ﬁnancial position, within cash collateral on securities borrowed and reverse repurchase agreements, reﬂecting the transaction’s economic substance as a loan by the Group. The di/uniFB00erence between the purchase and resale prices is recorded in net interest income and is accrued over the life of the agreement using the EIR.
If securities purchased under an agreement to resell are subsequently sold to third parties, the obligation to 
return the securities is recorded as a short sale within ﬁnancial liabilities held for trading and measured at fair value with any gains or losses included in net trading income.
4.17 Securities lending and borrowing
Securities lending and borrowing transactions are usually collateralised by securities or cash. The transfer of the securities to counterparties is only reﬂected on the statement of ﬁnancial position if the risks and rewards of ownership are also transferred. Cash advanced or received as collateral is recorded as an asset or liability.
Securities borrowed are not recognised in the statement of ﬁnancial position, unless they are then sold to third 
parties, in which case, the obligation to return the securities is recorded as a short sale within ﬁnancial liabilities held for trading and measured at fair value with any gains or losses included in net trading income.
4.18 Leases 
The Group assesses at contract inception whether a contract is, or contains, a lease. That is, if the contract conveys the right to control the use of an identiﬁed asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration.
4.18.1 The Group as a lessee
 The Group assesses whether a contract is or contains a lease, at inception of the contract. The Group recognises a right-of-use asset and a corresponding lease liability with respect to all lease arrangements in which it is the lessee, except for short-term leases (deﬁned as leases with a lease term of 12 months or less) and leases of low Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
101value assets (such as tablets and personal computers, small items of o/uniFB03ce furniture and telephones). For these 
leases, the Group recognises the lease payments as an operating expense on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease unless another systematic basis is more representative of the time pattern in which economic beneﬁts from the leased assets are consumed.
The lease liability is initially measured at the present value of the lease payments that are not paid at the 
commencement date, discounted by using the rate implicit in the lease. If this rate cannot be readily determined, the Group uses its incremental borrowing rate. 
Lease payments included in the measurement of the lease liability comprise:
• Fixed lease payments (including in-substance ﬁxed payments), less any lease incentives receivable;
• Variable lease payments that depend on an index or rate, initially measured using the index or rate at the 
commencement date;
• The amount expected to be payable by the lessee under residual value guarantees;
• The exercise price of purchase options, if the lessee is reasonably certain to exercise the options; and
• Payments of penalties for terminating the lease, if the lease term reﬂects the exercise of an option to terminate the lease.
The lease liability is included in Other Liabilities in the consolidated statement of ﬁnancial position.
The lease liability is subsequently measured by increasing the carrying amount to reﬂect interest on the lease 
liability (using the e/uniFB00ective interest method) and by reducing the carrying amount to reﬂect the lease payments made.
The Group remeasures the lease liability (and makes a corresponding adjustment to the related right-of-use 
asset) whenever: 
• The lease term has changed or there is a signiﬁcant event or change in circumstances resulting in a change in the assessment of exercise of a purchase option, in which case the lease liability is remeasured by discounting the revised lease payments using a revised discount rate.
• The lease payments change due to changes in an index or rate or a change in expected payment under a guaranteed residual value, in which cases the lease liability is remeasured by discounting the revised lease payments using an unchanged discount rate (unless the lease payments change is due to a change in a ﬂoating interest rate, in which case a revised discount rate is used).
• A lease contract is modiﬁed and the lease modiﬁcation is not accounted for as a separate lease, in which case the lease liability is remeasured based on the lease term of the modiﬁed lease by discounting the revised lease payments using a revised discount rate at the e/uniFB00ective date of the modiﬁcation. 
The Group did not make any such adjustments during the periods presented.
The right-of-use assets comprise the initial measurement of the corresponding lease liability, lease payments 
made at or before the commencement day, less any lease incentives received and any initial direct costs. They are subsequently measured at cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses. Whenever the Group incurs an obligation for costs to dismantle and remove a leased asset, restore the site on which it is located or restore the underlying asset to the condition required by the terms and conditions of the lease, a provision is recognised and measured under IAS 37. To the extent that the costs relate to a right-of use asset, the costs are included in the related right-of-use asset, unless those costs are incurred to produce inventories.
Right-of-use assets are depreciated over the shorter period of lease term and useful life of the right-of-use 
asset. If a lease transfers ownership of the underlying asset or the cost of the right-of-use asset reﬂects that the Group expects to exercise a purchase option, the related right-of-use asset is depreciated over the useful life of the underlying asset. The depreciation starts at the commencement date of the lease. Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
102The right-of-use assets are presented within Property and Equipment in the consolidated statement of ﬁnancial 
position.
The Group applies IAS 36 to determine whether a right-of-use asset is impaired and accounts for any identiﬁed 
impairment loss as described in Note 4.21 Impairment of non-ﬁnancial assets. Variable rents that do not depend on an index or rate are not included in the measurement the lease liability and the right-of-use asset. The related payments are recognised as an expense in the period in which the event or condition that triggers those payments occurs and are included in the line “Other expenses” in proﬁt or loss (see note 16). 
As a practical expedient, IFRS 16 permits a lessee not to separate non-lease components, and instead account 
for any lease and associated non-lease components as a single arrangement. The Group has not used this practical expedient. For a contract that contain a lease component and one or more additional lease or non-lease components, the Group allocates the consideration in the contract to each lease component on the basis of the relative stand-alone price of the lease component and the aggregate stand-alone price of the non-lease components.
4.18.2 The Group as a lessor
The Group enters into lease agreements as a lessor with respect to some of its investment properties.
Leases for which the Group is a lessor are classiﬁed as ﬁnance or operating leases. Whenever the terms of the 
lease transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the lessee, the contract is classiﬁed as a ﬁnance lease. All other leases are classiﬁed as operating leases. When the Group is an intermediate lessor, it accounts for the head lease and the sub-lease as two separate contracts. The sub-lease is classiﬁed as a ﬁnance or operating lease by reference to the right-of-use asset arising from the head lease. 
Rental income from operating leases is recognised on a straight-line basis over the term of the relevant lease. 
Initial direct costs incurred in negotiating and arranging an operating lease are added to the carrying amount of the leased asset and recognised on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Amounts due from lessees under ﬁnance leases are recognised as receivables at the amount of the Group’s net investment in the leases. Finance lease income is allocated to accounting periods so as to reﬂect a constant periodic rate of return on the Group’s net investment outstanding in respect of the leases. Subsequent to initial recognition, the Group regularly reviews the estimated unguaranteed residual value and applies the impairment requirements of IFRS 9, recognising an allowance for expected credit losses on the lease receivables.
Finance lease income is calculated with reference to the gross carrying amount of the lease receivables, except 
for credit-impaired ﬁnancial assets for which interest income is calculated with reference to their amortised cost (i.e. after a deduction of the loss allowance). When a contract includes both lease and non-lease components, the Group applies IFRS 15 to allocate the consideration under the contract to each component.
4.19 Property and equipment 
Property and equipment are tangible items that are held for use in the production or supply of goods or services, for rental to others, or for administrative purposes and are expected to be used during more than one period. 
(i) Recognition and measurementItems of property and equipment are measured at cost less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated 
impairment losses. Cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the assets. Right-of-use assets are presented together with property and equipment in the statement of ﬁnancial position – refer to the accounting policy in Note 4.18.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
103Purchased software that is integral to the functionality of the related equipment is capitalized as part of that 
equipment. When parts of an item of property or equipment have di/uniFB00erent useful lives, they are accounted for as separate items (major components) of property and equipment.
The cost of self-constructed assets includes the cost of materials and direct labour and any other costs directly 
attributable to bringing the asset to a working condition for its intended use.
Any gain or loss on disposal of an item of property and equipment (calculated as the di/uniFB00erence between the 
net proceeds from disposal and the carrying amount of the item) is recognised within other income in proﬁt or loss.
(ii) Subsequent costsThe cost of replacing part of an item of property or equipment is recognised in the carrying amount of the item 
if it is probable that future economic beneﬁts embodied within the part will ﬂow to the Group and its cost can be measured reliably. The costs of the day to day servicing of property and equipment are recognised in proﬁt or loss as incurred.
(iii) DepreciationDepreciation is the systematic allocation of the depreciable amount of an asset (i.e. the cost of the asset, or 
other amount substituted for cost, less its residual value) over its useful life.
Depreciation is recognised in proﬁt or loss on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of each part of 
an item of property and equipment. Freehold Land is not depreciated.
The estimated useful lives for the current and comparative periods are as follows:
Computers 3 years
Motor vehicles 4 years
Furniture and equipment 3-4 years
Buildings 50 years
Depreciation methods, useful lives and residual values are reviewed at each reporting date and adjusted if 
appropriate.
Right-of-use assets are depreciated over the shorter period of the lease term and the useful life of the underlying 
asset. If a lease transfers ownership of the underlying asset or the cost of the right-of-use asset reﬂects that the Group expects to exercise a purchase option, the related right-of-use asset is depreciated over the useful life of the underlying asset.
(iv) Capital work-in-progressProperty and equipment under construction is stated at initial cost and depreciated from the date the asset is 
made available for use over its estimated useful life. Assets are transferred from capital work in progress to an appropriate class of property and equipment when commissioned and ready for its intended use.
(v) Dual use propertyProperties that are partly used for own use activities and partly for rental activities are considered dual use 
properties. This would result in the property being considered to be classiﬁed as part property and equipment and the other part as investment property. If a signiﬁcant portion of the property is used for own use and the portion rented out cannot be sold or leased out separately under a ﬁnance lease, then the entire property is classiﬁed as property and equipment. The Group considers an own use portion above 95% of the measure as signiﬁcant.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
104(vi) Derecognition
Property and equipment are derecognised upon disposal or when no future economic beneﬁts are expected to 
ﬂow to the Group from either their use or disposal, if applicable. The gain or loss arising on the disposal or retirement of an asset is determined as the di/uniFB00erence between the sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and is recognised in proﬁt or loss.
4.20 Intangible assets
Intangible assets are the identiﬁable non-monetary assets without physical substance.
Intangible assets comprise computer software licenses and customer relationship. Intangible assets acquired by 
the Group and have ﬁnite useful lives are measured at cost less accumulated amortization and any accumulated impairment losses. 
Subsequent expenditure is capitalised only when it increases future economic beneﬁts embodied in the speciﬁc 
asset to which it relates. All other expenditure is expensed as incurred.
Amortisation is calculated to write o/uniFB00 the cost of intangible assets less their estimated residual values using the 
straight line method and recognised in proﬁt or loss over its estimated useful life, from the date that it is available for use.
The estimated useful life for the current and comparative periods are as follows:Software       3 years
Customer Relationship      5 years
Amortization methods, useful lives and residual values are reviewed at each reporting date and adjusted, if 
appropriate.
An intangible asset is derecognised on disposal, or when no future economic beneﬁts are expected from use or 
disposal. Gains or losses arising from derecognition of an intangible asset, measured as the di/uniFB00erence between the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset, are recognised in proﬁt or loss when the asset is derecognised.
4.21 Impairment of non-ﬁnancial assets
The carrying amounts of the Group’s non ﬁnancial assets other than deferred tax assets are reviewed at each reporting date to determine whether there is any indication of impairment. If any such indication exists, then the asset’s recoverable amount is estimated. An impairment loss is recognised if the carrying amount of an asset or its cash generating unit (CGU) exceeds its recoverable amount, unless the relevant asset is carried at a revalued amount, in which case the impairment loss is treated as a revaluation decrease and to the extent that the impairment loss is greater than the related revaluation surplus, the excess impairment loss is recognised in proﬁt or loss.
The recoverable amount is the higher of its value in use and its fair value less costs of disposal. In assessing 
value in use, the estimated future cash ﬂows are discounted to their present value using pre tax discount rates that reﬂect current market assessments of the time value of money and risks speciﬁc to the asset.
A previously recognised impairment loss is reversed where there has been a change in circumstances or in the 
basis of estimation used to determine the recoverable value, but only to the extent that the asset’s net carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount of the asset that would have been determined, net of depreciation or amortisation, if no impairment loss had been recognised. Any increase in excess of this amount is treated as a revaluation increase.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
1054.22 Employment beneﬁts
(i) Deﬁned contribution plans
Obligations for contributions to deﬁned contribution pension plans are recognised as personnel expenses in 
proﬁt or loss in the period during which related services are rendered. The Group has the following deﬁned contribution schemes:
Social Security and National Insurance TrustUnder the national pension scheme, the Bank contributes 13% of employees’ basic salary to the Social Security 
and National Insurance Trust (SSNIT) for employee pensions. The Group’s obligation is limited to the relevant contributions, which have been recognised in the ﬁnancial statements. The pension liabilities and obligations, however, rest with SSNIT.
Provident FundThe Group has a Provident Fund Scheme for all employees who have completed their probation period. 
Employees contribute 10% of their basic salary to the Fund whilst the Group contributes 12.5%. Obligations under the plan are limited to the relevant contributions which have been recognised in the ﬁnancial statements and are settled on due dates to the Fund Manager.
(ii) Deﬁned beneﬁt plansThe Group’s obligation in respect of deﬁned beneﬁt plans is calculated separately for each plan by estimating 
the amount of future beneﬁts that employees have earned in the current and prior periods, discounting that amount and deducting the fair value of any plan assets.
The calculation of deﬁned beneﬁt obligations is performed annually by a Qualiﬁed Actuary using the Projected 
Unit Credit Method. Remeasurements of the net deﬁned beneﬁt liability, which comprise actuarial gains and losses is recognised immediately in other comprehensive income.
The Group determines the net interest expense (income) on the deﬁned beneﬁt liability for the period by 
applying the discount rate used to measure the deﬁned beneﬁt obligation at the beginning of the annual period to the deﬁned beneﬁt liability at the period end, taking into account any changes in the deﬁned beneﬁt liability during the period as a result of contributions and beneﬁt payments.
Net interest expense and other expenses related to deﬁned beneﬁt plans are recognised in personnel expenses 
in proﬁt or loss. When the beneﬁts of a plan are changed or when a plan is curtailed, the resulting change in beneﬁts that relate to past service or the gain or loss on curtailment is recognised immediately in proﬁt or loss. The Group recognises gains and losses on the settlement of a deﬁned beneﬁt plan when the settlement occurs.
The Group has the following deﬁned beneﬁt plans:
• Post-Retirement Medical Care
The Bank pays for post-retirement medical care of its sta/uniFB00.
• Pension Beneﬁts
The Group pays monthly pension beneﬁts to retired employees, under a closed deﬁned beneﬁt pension scheme. 
Under this scheme, beneﬁciaries are paid pensions equal to 60% of the net basic salaries of their serving counterparts. The scheme has been discontinued since 1985. At the reporting date, the scheme covered a closed Group of 214 (2021: 246) persons, who still receive monthly pensions. The monthly pensions are increased annually in line with adjustments to the basic salaries of their serving counterparts.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
106• Long service award
Long service awards accrue to employees based on graduated periods of uninterrupted service. These awards 
accrue over the service life of employees. Employees in service with the Group after ﬁfteen (15) years become eligible to receive cash payments at graduated rates when employees achieve stipulated milestones set by the Group.
(iii) Other long-term employee beneﬁtsThe Company’s obligation in respect of long-term employee beneﬁts is the amount of future beneﬁts that 
employees have earned in return for their services in the current and prior periods. That beneﬁt is discounted to determine its present value. Re-measurement are recognised in proﬁt or loss in the period in which they arise. 
(iv) Termination beneﬁtsThe Group recognises termination beneﬁts when it is demonstrably committed to either terminating the 
employment of current employees according to a detailed formal plan; or providing termination beneﬁts as a result of an o/uniFB00er made to encourage voluntary redundancy. If beneﬁts are not expected to be wholly settled within 12 months of the reporting date, then they are discounted.
(v) Short term Employment beneﬁts Short term employee beneﬁt obligations are measured on an undiscounted basis and are expensed as the 
related service is provided. A provision is recognised for the amount expected to be paid under short term cash bonus or proﬁt sharing plans, if the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation to pay this amount as a result of past service provided by the employee and the obligation can be estimated reliably.
4.23 Provisions and Contingent Liabilities
Provisions
A provision is recognised if, as a result of a past event, the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation 
that can be estimated reliably, and it is probable that an outﬂow of the economic beneﬁts will be required to settle the obligation. Provisions are not recognised for future operating losses.
Provisions are measured at the present value of expenditures expected to be required to settle obligations using 
pre-tax rates that reﬂect current market assessments of the time value of money and risks speciﬁc to the obligation. The unwinding of the discount is recognised as ﬁnance cost. The expense relating to any provision is presented in the income statement net of any reimbursement in other operating expenses. When some or all of the economic beneﬁts required to settle a provision are expected to be recovered from a third party, a receivable is recognised as an asset if it is virtually certain that reimbursement will be received and the amount of the receivable can be measured reliably. Detailed disclosures are provided in Note 33.
Contingent liabilitiesA contingent liability is a possible obligation that arises from past events and whose existence will be conﬁrmed 
only by the occurrence or non-occurrence of one or more uncertain future events not wholly within the control of the Group, or a present obligation that arises from past events but is not recognised because it is not probable that an outﬂow of resources embodying economic beneﬁts will be required to settle the obligation; or the amount of the obligation cannot be measured with su/uniFB03cient reliability. If the likelihood of an outﬂow of resources is remote, the possible obligation is neither a provision nor a contingent liability and no disclosure is made.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
1074.24 Taxation
The income tax expense represents the sum of the tax currently payable and deferred tax.4.24.1. Current tax 
The tax currently payable is based on taxable proﬁt for the year. Taxable proﬁt di/uniFB00ers from net proﬁt as reported 
in proﬁt or loss because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible. The Group’s liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the end of the reporting period.
A provision is recognised for those matters for which the tax determination is uncertain but it is considered 
probable that there will be a future outﬂow of funds to a tax authority. The provisions are measured at the best estimate of the amount expected to become payable. The assessment is based on the judgement of tax professionals within the Group supported by previous experience in respect of such activities and in certain cases based on specialist independent tax advice. 
Current tax assets and liabilities for the current and prior years are measured at the amount expected to be 
recovered from, or paid to, the taxation authorities. The tax rates and tax laws used to compute the amount are those that are enacted, or substantively enacted, by the reporting date in the countries where the Group operates and generates taxable income.
Current income tax relating to items recognised directly in equity or other comprehensive income is recognised 
in equity or other comprehensive income respectively and not in the statement of proﬁt or loss. Management periodically evaluates positions taken in the tax returns with respect to situations in which applicable tax regulations are subject to interpretation and establishes provisions where appropriate. Detailed disclosures are provided in Note 19.
4.24.2. Deferred tax
Deferred tax is provided on temporary di/uniFB00erences at the reporting date between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for ﬁnancial reporting purposes.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for all taxable temporary di/uniFB00erences, except:
• Where the deferred tax liability arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or of an asset or liability in a 
transaction that is not a business combination and, at the time of the transaction, a/uniFB00ects neither the accounting proﬁt nor taxable proﬁt or loss;
• In respect of taxable temporary di/uniFB00erences associated with investments in subsidiaries and associates, where the timing of the reversal of the temporary di/uniFB00erences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary di/uniFB00erences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each reporting date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that su/uniFB03cient taxable proﬁt will be available to allow all or part of the deferred tax asset to be utilised. Unrecognised deferred tax assets are reassessed at each reporting date and are recognised to the extent that it becomes probable that future taxable proﬁt will allow the deferred tax asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the year when the 
asset is realised or the liability is settled, based on tax rates (and tax laws) that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date.
Current and deferred taxes are recognised as income tax beneﬁts or expenses in the income statement except 
for tax related to the fair value re-measurement of debt instruments at fair value through OCI, foreign exchange di/uniFB00erences and the net movement on cash ﬂow hedges, which are charged or credited to OCI.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
108These exceptions are subsequently reclassiﬁed from OCI to the income statement together with the respective 
deferred loss or gain. The Group also recognises the tax consequences of payments and issuing costs, related to ﬁnancial instruments that are classiﬁed as equity, directly in equity.
The Group only o/uniFB00-sets its deferred tax assets against liabilities when there is both a legal right to o/uniFB00set its 
current tax assets and liabilities and it is the Group’s intention to settle on a net basis.
4.24.3. Levies and similar charges
The Group recognises the liability arising from levies and similar charges (such as National Stabilization Levy and Financial Sector Recovery Levy) when it becomes legally enforceable, which is on 31 December each year.
4.25 Stated capital and reserves
(i) Share capital
The Group classiﬁes capital and equity instruments in accordance with the contractual terms of the instrument. 
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of ordinary shares, net of any tax e/uniFB00ects are recognised as a deduction from equity.
(ii) DividendsDividends on ordinary shares are recognised in the period in which they are approved by the shareholders. 
Dividend proposed which is yet to be approved by shareholders, is disclosed by way of notes.
(iii) Statutory reserveStatutory reserve is based on the requirements of section 34(1) of the Banks and Specialized Deposit-Taking 
Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930). Transfers into statutory reserve are made in accordance with the relationship between the Bank’s reserve fund and it’s paid up capital, which determines the proportion of proﬁts for the period that should be transferred.
(i) Where the reserve fund is less than ﬁfty percent of the stated capital, then an amount not less than 50% of 
net proﬁt for the year is transferred to the reserve fund.(ii) Where the reserve fund is more than 50% but less than 100% of the stated capital, then an amount not less 
than 25% of net proﬁt is transferred to the reserve fund.(iii)  Where the reserve fund is equal to or more than 100% of the stated capital, then an amount not less than 
12.5% of the net proﬁt for the year is transferred to the reserve fund.(iv) Credit risk reserve
This is a reserve created to set aside the excess or shortfalls between amounts recognised as impairment loss 
on loans and advances based on provisions made for bad and doubtful loans and advances calculated in accordance with IFRS and the Central Bank’s prudential guidelines. See note 36iii.
4.26 Earnings per share
The Bank presents basic and diluted earnings per share (EPS) data for its ordinary shares. Basic EPS is calculated by dividing the proﬁt or loss attributable to ordinary shareholders by the number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. The Bank has no convertible notes and share options, which could potentially dilute its EPS and therefore the Bank’s Basic and diluted EPS are essentially the same.
4.27 Fiduciary assets
The Bank provides trust and other ﬁduciary services that result in the holding or investing of assets on behalf of its clients. Assets held in a ﬁduciary capacity, unless recognition criteria are met, are not reported in the ﬁnancial statements, as they are not assets of the Bank.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
1094.28  Segment reporting
Segment results that are reported to the Group’s Managing Director (being the chief operating decision maker) 
include items that are directly attributable to a segment as well as those that can be allocated on a reasonable basis. Unallocated items comprise mainly corporate assets (primarily the Bank’s property and equipment), head o/uniFB03ce expenses and tax assets and liabilities.
The Group has four reportable segments: retail banking, corporate banking, commercial banking, and treasury 
which are the Group’s strategic operations. For each reportable segment, the Group’s Managing Director reviews internal management reports on the performance of each segment.
5. Signiﬁcant accounting judgements, estimates and assumptions
The preparation of the Group’s consolidated ﬁnancial statements requires management to make judgements, estimates and assumptions that a/uniFB00ect the reported amount of revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities, and the accompanying disclosures, as well as the disclosure of contingent liabilities. Uncertainty about these assumptions and estimates could result in outcomes that require a material adjustment to the carrying amount of assets or liabilities a/uniFB00ected in future periods. In the process of applying the Group’s accounting policies, management has made the following judgements and assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty at the reporting date, that have a signiﬁcant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next ﬁnancial year. The estimates and associated assumptions are based on historical experience and other factors that are considered to be relevant. 
Existing circumstances and assumptions about future developments may change due to circumstances beyond 
the Group’s control and are reﬂected in the assumptions if and when they occur. 
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis. Revisions to accounting estimates 
are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision a/uniFB00ects only that period, or in the period of the revision and future periods if the revision a/uniFB00ects both current and future periods.
Items with the most signiﬁcant e/uniFB00ect on the amounts recognised in the consolidated ﬁnancial statements with 
substantial management judgement and/or estimates are collated below with respect to judgements/estimates involved.
5.1. Impairment losses on ﬁnancial assets
The measurement of impairment losses under IFRS 9 across all categories of ﬁnancial assets in scope requires some level of judgement. In particular, management makes its signiﬁcant judgement in the assessment of signiﬁcant increase in credit risk and default. As explained in note 4.10, ECL is measured as an allowance equal to 12-month ECL for stage 1 assets, or lifetime ECL for stage 2 or stage 3 assets. An asset moves to stage 3 when its credit risk has increased signiﬁcantly and has met predeﬁned default criteria since initial recognition. The term “default” is not deﬁned in IFRS 9. In assessing whether an asset has met the predeﬁned default criteria, the Group takes into account qualitative and quantitative reasonable and supportable forward-looking information.
5.2. Fair value of ﬁnancial instruments
The fair value of ﬁnancial instruments is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction in the principal (or most advantageous) market at the measurement date under current market conditions (i.e., an exit price) regardless of whether that price is directly observable or estimated using another valuation technique. When the fair values of ﬁnancial assets and ﬁnancial liabilities recorded in the statement of ﬁnancial position cannot be derived from active markets, they are determined using a variety of valuation techniques that include the use of valuation models. The inputs to these models are taken from observable markets where possible, but where this is not feasible, estimation is required in establishing fair Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
110values. Judgements and estimates include considerations of liquidity and model inputs related to items such as 
credit risk (both own and counterparty), funding value adjustments, correlation and volatility.
For further details about determination of fair value, please see Note 4.6.
5.3. Provisions and other contingent liabilities
The Group operates in a regulatory and legal environment that, by nature, has a heightened element of litigation 
risk inherent to its operations. As a result, it is involved in various litigation, arbitration and regulatory investigations and proceedings arising in the ordinary course of the Group’s business.
When the Group can reliably measure the outﬂow of economic beneﬁts in relation to a speciﬁc case and 
considers such outﬂows to be probable, the Group records a provision against the case. Where the probability of outﬂow is considered to be remote, or probable, but a reliable estimate cannot be made, a contingent liability is disclosed. However, when the Group is of the opinion that disclosing these estimates on a case-by-case basis would prejudice their outcome, then the Group does not include detailed, case-speciﬁc disclosers in its ﬁnancial statements.
Given the subjectivity and uncertainty of determining the probability and amount of losses, the Group takes 
into account a number of factors including legal advice, the stage of the matter and historical evidence from similar incidents. Signiﬁcant judgement is required to conclude on these estimates.
For further details on provisions and other contingencies, see Notes 4.23 and 37.
5.4. Employee beneﬁt obligations
Discount rate used to determine the carrying amount of the Group’s deﬁned beneﬁt obligation
The determination of the Group’s deﬁned beneﬁt obligation depends on certain assumptions, which include 
selection of the discount rate. The discount rate is set by reference to market yields at the end of the reporting period on high quality corporate bonds or, where there is not an active market in high quality corporate bonds, the market yields (at the end of the reporting period) on government bonds are used. Signiﬁcant assumptions are required to be made when setting the criteria for bonds to be included in the population from which the yield curve is derived. The most signiﬁcant criteria considered for the selection of bonds include the currency of the bonds, quality of the bonds and the term of the bonds. These assumptions are considered to be a key source of estimation uncertainty as relatively small changes in the assumptions used may have a signiﬁcant e/uniFB00ect on the Group’s ﬁnancial statements within the next year. Further information on the carrying amounts of the Group’s deﬁned beneﬁt obligation and the sensitivity of those amounts to changes in discount rate are provided in note 3 
6. Financial risk management
E/uniFB00ective risk management is of critical importance and key to the delivery of sustainable returns for shareholders. Risk taking is an inherent part of the Group’s business activities and is deﬁned as the possibility of losing some or all of an original investment. Risk management systems and governance structures are designed to reduce earnings volatility and achieve an appropriate balance between risk and reward and increased proﬁtability. 
Current changes to regulations in the banking sector reinforce the Group’s commitment to embed an enhanced 
risk-based culture throughout the Group. Risk policies and procedures are regularly reviewed to reﬂect these changes as well as best practices in the market. The Group has upgraded its risk infrastructure to enhance e/uniFB00ective management and also to meet future regulatory demands.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
111Risk Management Framework 
The risk management framework consists of a comprehensive set of policies, standards, procedures and 
processes designed to identify, measure, monitor, mitigate and report signiﬁcant risk exposure in a consistent and e/uniFB00ective manner across the Group. Through the framework, risk is managed at enterprise-wide level, with the objective of maximizing risk-adjusted returns within the context of the Group’s risk appetite.
The most important types of risk are credit risk, liquidity risk, market risk and operational risk. 
• Credit risk reﬂects the possible inability of a customer to meet his/her repayment or delivery obligations. 
• Market risk, which includes foreign currency risk, interest rate risk and equity price risk, is the risk of ﬂuctuation 
in asset and commodity values caused by changes in market prices and yields. 
• Liquidity risk results in the inability to accommodate liability maturities and withdrawals, fund asset growth or otherwise meet contractual obligations at reasonable market rates. 
• Operational risk is the potential loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, systems, people, legal issues, external events and non-compliance with regulatory issues.
The Board of Directors have overall responsibility for the establishment and oversight of the Group’s risk management framework. The Board’s commitment to good risk management is supported by their continuing professional development in the ﬁeld of risk management and their support for the implementation and continued improvement of the risk management framework within the Group. 
The Board’s Risk Committee is responsible for monitoring risk positions which the Group holds in the normal 
course of business as well as those risks that the Group may take in alignment with approved limits and controls. The Committee also reviews the adequacy of the risk management framework in relation to risks faced by the Group on an ongoing basis. The Committee is assisted in its functions by a risk management structure, which ensures consistent assessment of risk management controls and procedures. 
The Board Audit Committee is responsible for reviewing the Group’s accounting policies, the contents of ﬁnancial 
reports, disclosure controls and procedures, management’s approach to internal controls, the adequacy and scope of the external and internal audit functions, compliance with regulatory and ﬁnancial reporting requirements, overseeing relationships with the Group’s external auditors and providing assurance to the Board that executive management’s control assurance process are complete and e/uniFB00ective.
The Credit Committee is the highest management level authority on all counterparty risk exposures. It oversees 
control and management of all policies, processes and procedures relating to the Bank’s lending function. The scope of risks covered by this Committee includes Credit Risk, Concentration Risk and Country & Cross Border Risk. 
The Operational Risk and Control Committee is an Executive Management Committee with responsibility for 
monitoring and managing the level of operational risk exposures within the Bank as well as overseeing the control and management of all policies, processes and procedures relating to the Bank’s Operational Risk function. 
Asset and Liability Committee (ALCO) is a Management Committee which is a decision-making body for 
developing policies relating to all asset and liability management (ALM) matters. 
The Risk Management Department (RMD) is responsible for developing and monitoring the Group’s risk 
management policies and procedures over speciﬁed areas on a day-to-day basis. It reports regularly to the Board on its activities through the Executive Management Committee. Policies and procedures have been established to identify and analyze risks faced by the Bank and put appropriate controls in place to monitor adherence to these policies. These are reviewed regularly to reﬂect changes in market conditions, products and services o/uniFB00ered. Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
112Functional units or divisions are accountable for executing speciﬁc aspects of the Group’s activities. Authority 
is delegated to the Head of each functional unit by the Managing Director. The Head of each function in turn delegates responsibility to individual sta/uniFB00 for carrying out speciﬁc tasks in accordance with delegated authorities and within the procedural disciplines of the Group. 
Functions are organized in accordance with the “Three Lines of Defence” governance model. The three lines of 
defence are constituted as follows:
• The ﬁrst line of defence consists of functional units that are responsible for actual activities of the business and are responsible for managing their own risks. 
• The second line of defence consists of functional units that are responsible for monitoring activities of the ﬁrst line of defence and exercising risk control. The second line functions of the Bank are Governance, Risk, Compliance and Control, Product Control and Performance Monitoring. 
• The third line of defence consists of functional units that are responsible for reviewing the activities of line 1 and 2 functions at appropriate frequencies, assessing the robustness of control and mandating corrective action or improvement where necessary. Risk Assurance services are provided to the Bank by the Internal Audit function.
Risk Appetite
Risk appetite is an expression of the amount of risk the Group is willing to take in pursuit of its strategic objectives, reﬂecting capacity to sustain losses and continue to meet obligations arising from a range of di/uniFB00erent stress conditions. 
This is used to maximize returns without exposing the Group to levels of risk above its appetite. In particular, 
the risk appetite framework assists in protecting ﬁnancial performance and improves management’s responsiveness. It also improves control and co-ordination of risk-taking across business units and identiﬁes unused risk capacity in pursuit of proﬁtable opportunities. 
The board approved the Group’s risk appetite statement which forms the basis for establishing risk parameters 
within which business units must operate, including policies, concentration limits and business mix.
Credit Risk Management
Credit risk is the potential for ﬁnancial loss due to the failure of counterparties to meet obligations to pay the Group in accordance with agreed terms. Credit risk is the most important risk for the Group’s business. 
Management carefully manages its exposure to credit risk. Credit risk is attributed to both on-balance sheet 
ﬁnancial instruments such as loans, overdrafts, cash held with other ﬁnancial institutions, debt securities and other bills, investments, and acceptances and credit equivalent amounts related to o/uniFB00 -balance sheet ﬁnancial items. The Bank’s approach to credit risk management preserves the independence and integrity of risk assessment, while being integrated into business management processes. Credit risk is managed through a framework that sets out policies and procedures covering the identiﬁcation, measurement and management of credit risk. The goal of credit risk management is to evaluate and manage credit risk in order to further enhance a strong credit culture.
Credit Concentration Risk
Credit concentration risk is the risk of loss to the Group arising from excessive concentration of exposure to a single counterparty, industry or sector, product or geographic area. Large exposure limits have been established under the Group’s credit policy in order to avoid excessive losses from any single counter-party who is unable to fulﬁl its payment obligations. Concentration risks are monitored on an ongoing basis and subject to annual or more frequent reviews when considered necessary.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
113Credit Mitigation
Potential credit losses from any given account, customer or portfolio are mitigated using a range of tools such 
as collateral, credit insurance and other guarantees. The reliance that can be placed on these mitigants is carefully assessed in the light of issues such as legal certainty and enforceability, market valuation and counterparty risk of the guarantor. Risk mitigation policies determine the eligibility of collateral types.
Collateral
In order to proactively respond to credit deterioration, the Group employs a range of policies and practices to mitigate credit risk. The most traditional of these is the taking of security for funds advanced, which is common practice. Collateral is held to mitigate credit risk exposures. Collateral types that are eligible for risk mitigation include: cash; residential, commercial and industrial property; property and equipment such as motor vehicles, plant and machinery, bank guarantees and ﬂoating charge over other assets. 
The risk mitigation policy prescribes the frequency of valuation for di/uniFB00erent collateral types, based on the level 
of price volatility of each type of collateral and the nature of the underlying product or risk exposure. Where appropriate, collateral values are adjusted to reﬂect current market conditions. Longer-term ﬁnance and lending to corporate entities are generally secured; individual credit facilities are generally unsecured. In addition, in order to minimize credit losses, the Group seeks additional collateral from counterparties as soon as impairment indicators are noticed for relevant individual loans and advances. 
Credit Related Commitments
Documentary and commercial letters of credit are written undertakings by the Group on behalf of a customer authorizing a third party to draw drafts on the Group up to a stipulated amount under speciﬁc terms and conditions. The primary purpose of these instruments is to ensure that funds are available to a customer as required. 
Guarantees and standby letters of credit carry less risk than direct loans. These arrangements are collateralized 
by the underlying shipments of goods. The likelihood of loss amounts is far less than the entire commitment as most commitments to extend credit of this nature are contingent upon the customer maintaining speciﬁc cash in margin accounts. The Group monitors the term to maturity of credit commitments because longer-term commitments generally have a greater degree of credit risk than shorter-term commitments.
Impairment
Under IFRS 9, Banks are required to record an allowance for expected losses for all loans, investments and other debt ﬁnancial assets at amortised costs, loan commitments and ﬁnancial guarantee contracts. The allowance is based on the expected credit losses associated with the probability of default in the next twelve months unless there has been a signiﬁcant increase in credit risk since origination, in which case, the allowance is based on the probability of default over the life of the asset. 
The measurement of expected credit losses is primarily based on the product of the instrument’s probability of 
default (PD), loss given default (LGD), and exposure at default (EAD), discounted to the reporting date using the e/uniFB00ective interest rate; 
• Probability of default (PD):  This is the probability that an obligor or counterparty will default over a given 
period, usually one year.
• Loss given default (LGD): LGD is deﬁned as the portion of the loan determined to be irrecoverable at the time of loan default (1 – recovery rate).
• Exposure at default (EAD):  This represents the amount that is outstanding at the point of default. Its 
estimation includes the drawn amount and expected utilization of the undrawn commitment at default.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
114Expected Credit Loss Model
The Expected Credit Loss model has been built based on segmentation of business lines to reﬂect appropriate 
level of granularity. 
• The Corporate model was segmented based on industry sectors which depict similar risk proﬁle and characteristics. 
• The Retail model was based on homogenous pool of cluster using product lines.
• The Investment model, mainly based on interbank placement, was also segmented into secured and unsecured products. The Treasury Bills and Government Bonds have, for the ﬁrst time, been considered for Expected Credit Loss due to the GDDE program 
• The O/uniFB00-Balance sheet items were modelled via Credit Conversion Factor (CCF) principle based on BoG Capital Requirement Directive.  Similarly, for contractual limits, the undrawn commitments CCF was applied to the undrawn portion to estimate the potential risk exposure. 
Impairment of loans is recognised on an individual or collective basis – in three stages under IFRS 9.
Stage 1 – When a loan or investment is originated or purchased, ECLs resulting from default events that are 
possible within the next 12 months are recognised and a loss allowance is established.  On subsequent reporting dates, 12-month ECL also applies to existing loans with no signiﬁcant increase in credit risk since their initial recognition. Interest revenue is calculated on the loan’s gross carrying amount.
Stage 2 – If a loan or investment’s credit risk has increased signiﬁcantly since initial recognition and is not 
considered low, lifetime ECLs are recognised. The calculation of interest revenue is the same as for Stage 1. 
Stage 3 – If the loan or investment’s credit risk increases to the point where it is considered credit-impaired, 
interest revenue is calculated based on the loan’s amortised cost that is, the gross carrying amount less the loss allowance. Lifetime ECLs are recognised, as in Stage 2.
The ECL model incorporated forward looking information including reasonable and supportable forecasts of 
future economic conditions. Future cash ﬂows and risk of default were also considered. The Bank considered three di/uniFB00erent scenarios for the model to mitigate non-linearity in the portfolio. The base, optimistic and pessimistic scenarios of macroeconomic conditions were used in estimating the probability of default. This was to ensure that the impairment estimates were not biased due to cyclicality of economic conditions. 
Early Alerts 
Corporate, Retail and Commercial Banking accounts are placed on early alert status when they display signs of weakness. Such accounts and portfolios are subject to a dedicated process of oversight involving Senior Risk O/uniFB03cers and Remedial O/uniFB03cers in the Loans Recovery Unit. The approach to Early Alerts monitoring includes but not limited to: 
• Deterioration of the customer’s ﬁnancial position;
• Delays by customers in settling their obligations; 
• Overdraft balances exceeding approved limits; and 
• Clear indications of the customer not being able to settle commitments on due dates. 
Customer payment plans are re-evaluated and remedial actions agreed and monitored until delinquency situations are resolved. Remedial actions include, but are not limited to, exposure reduction, security enhancement and movement of the account to the Loans Recovery Unit. Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
115Write o/uniFB00 policy 
The Bank writes o/uniFB00 loans and advances balance (and any related allowances for impairment losses) when the 
Bank’s Credit Risk Management determines that the loans and advances are uncollectible. This determination is reached after considering information such as the occurrence of signiﬁcant changes in the borrower’s ﬁnancial position such that the borrower can no longer discharge the obligation, or that proceeds from collateral will not be su/uniFB03cient to pay back the entire exposure. For smaller balance standardised loans, charge o/uniFB00 decisions generally are based on a product speciﬁc past due status. Related and connected lending is not permitted to be written o/uniFB00 unless with the approval of the Bank of Ghana and the Board of Directors.
Impairment (Prudential)
An account is considered to be in delinquent when payment is not received on due date. Accounts that are overdue by more than 90 days are considered default. These accounts are closely monitored and subjected to a collection process. The process used for impairment is based on Bank of Ghana guidelines which recognise cash as a credit mitigant. Individual impairments are made for outstanding amounts depending on the number of days past due with full impairment made after 360 days. In certain situations such as bankruptcy, fraud and death, the loss recognition process is accelerated. Loans and advances less than 90 days past due are generally not considered impaired unless other information is available to indicate otherwise. 
The Bank of Ghana Guideline is as set out below:
Grade Description Number of days Impairment (%)
Current Less than 30 days 1
Other Loans Exceptionally Mentioned (OLEM) 30 to less than 90 days 10
Substandard 90 to less than 180 25
Doubtful 180 to less than 360 days 50
Loss 360 days and above 100
Credit quality
The Bank monitors credit risk per class of ﬁnancial instrument. The table below outlines the classes identiﬁed, 
as well as the ﬁnancial statement line item and the note that provides an analysis of the items included in the ﬁnancial statement:
Class of ﬁnancial instrument Financial statement line Note
Loans and advances to banks at amortised cost Loans and advances to banks 25
Debt investment securities at amortised Cost Investment securities 26
Debt investment securities at FVTOCI Investment securities 26
Other assets Other assets 31
Loan commitments and ﬁnancial guarantee 
contractsContingent Liabilities & Commitments 37
An analysis of the Bank’s credit risk concentrations per class of ﬁnancial asset is provided in the following tables. 
Unless speciﬁcally indicated, for ﬁnancial assets, the amounts in the table represent gross carrying amounts. For loan commitments and ﬁnancial guarantee contracts, the amounts in the table represent the amounts committed or guaranteed, respectively.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
116Credit Quality
Loans and advances to customers at amortised cost
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2022 2021
Retail:
Personal Loan  2,231,163  1,648,988 
Corporate Employee Scheme  332,935  215,475 
SME  9,633  12,596 
Sta/uniFB00 Loan  210,554  150,072 
Corporate:  - 
Agriculture, forestry & ﬁshing  47,855  23,070 
Commerce & ﬁnance  1,129,804  922,267 
Construction  176,761  106,032 
Electricity, gas & water  88,357  191,268 
Manufacturing  366,138  321,168 
Mining & quarrying  41,696  96,734 
Services  1,872,622  1,366,594 
Transport, storage & communication  58,828  62,195 
Total  6,566,346  5,116,459 
Concentration by regionEurope  -  - 
America  -  - 
Middle East and Africa  6,566,346  5,116,459 
Asia  -  - 
Total  6,566,346  5,116,459 
InvestmentConcentration by TypeSovereign  10,425,035  9,707,421 
Banking  189,031  189,031 
Total  10,614,066  9,896,452 
Concentration by regionEurope  -  - 
Middle East and Africa  10,614,066  9,889,794 
Total  10,614,066  9,889,794 
An analysis of the Bank’s credit risk exposure per class of ﬁnancial asset, internal rating and “stage” without 
taking into account the e/uniFB00ects of any collateral or other credit enhancements is provided in the following tables. Unless speciﬁcally indicated, for ﬁnancial assets, the amounts in the table represent gross carrying amounts. For loan commitments and ﬁnancial guarantee contract the amounts in the table represent the amounts committed or guaranteed, respectively.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
117Loans and Advances to Customers 
at Amortised costs Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3 /uni00A0 2022 2021 
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  
POCI  Total  Total 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
On Balance sheetGrades 1-3: Low to fair risk 4,920,600  -  -  -  4,920,600  4,110,973 
Grades 4-6 Monitoring  -  293,828  -  -  293,828  187,488 
Grades 7-8: Substandard  -  -  245,513  -  245,513  129,460 
Grade 9: Doubtful  -  -  149,915  -  149,915  67,189 
Grade 10: Impaired  -  -  956,490  -  956,490  621,349 
Total gross carrying amount 4,920,600  293,828  1,351,918  -  6,566,346  5,116,459 
Loss allowance  105,887  43,702  901,066  -  1,050,655  775,374 
Interbank PlacementGrades 1-3: Low to fair risk  189,031  -  -  -  189,031  189,031 
Grades 4-6 Monitoring  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Grades 7-8: Substandard  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Grade 9: Doubtful  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Grade 10: Impaired  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Total gross carrying amount  189,031  -  -  -  189,031  189,031 
Loss allowance  2,926  -  -  -  2,926  2,926 
O/uniFB00 Balance sheetGrades 1-3: Low to fair risk  1,611,077  -  -  -  1,611,077  1,437,296 
Grades 4-6 Monitoring  -  8,910  -  -  8,910  - 
Grades 7-8: Substandard  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Grade 9: Doubtful  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Grade 10: Impaired  -  -  -  -  -  6,388 
Total gross carrying amount 1,611,077  8,910  -  -  1,619,987  
1,443,684 
Loss allowance  32,515  960  -  -  33,475  34,705 
InvestmentGrades 1-3: Low to fair risk  -  - 9,707,421 
Grades 4-6 Monitoring  - 3,696,876  -  -  3,696,876  - 
Grades 7-8: Substandard  -  -  6,728,159  -  6,728,159  - 
Grade 9: Doubtful  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Grade 10: Impaired  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Total gross carrying amount  - 3,696,876  6,728,159  - 10,425,025 9,707,421 
Loss allowance  123,192  1,691,282  -  1,814,474  - 
Loss allowance charge in the current year is resulting from the debt exchange program. See note 15b.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
118This table summarises the loss allowance as of the year end by class of exposure/asset.
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2022 2021
Class of exposure/asset
Loss allowanceLoans and advances to customers at amortised cost  1,050,656  775,374 
Debt investment securities at amortised cost  1,814,474  - 
Inter bank Placements  2,926  2,926 
O/uniFB00 balance sheet  33,475  34,705 
Total  2,901,531  813,005 
The Bank did not recognise any other class of Purchased or Originally Credit Impaired (POCI) ﬁnancial assets 
during the period. More information about the signiﬁcant changes in the gross carrying amount of ﬁnancial assets during the period that contributed to changes in the loss allowance is provided in the table below:
Loans and advances to customers at 
Amortised Cost Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3 /uni00A0 /uni00A0
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
Gross carrying amount as at 01/01/2022 4,110,973  187,488  817,998  -  5,116,459 
Changes in the gross carrying amount  -  -  -  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 1  17,078  (13,173)  (3,905)  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 2  (25,539)  26,648  (1,109)  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 3  (40,231)  (128,525)  168,756  -  - 
––Changes  due  to  modiﬁcations  that  did  not  result  in derecognition 117,361  41,598  121,840  -  280,799 
New ﬁnancial assets originated or purchased 2,548,105  229,487  873,633  -  3,651,225 
Financial assets that have been derecognised (1,551,840)  (43,288)  (591,565)  -  (2,186,693)
Other changes  (255,307)  (6,407)  (33,730)  -  (295,444)
Gross carrying amount as at 31/12/2022 4,920,600  293,828  1,351,918  -  6,566,346 
Loss allowance as at 31/12/2022  105,887  43,702  901,066  -  1,050,655 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
119Loss  allowance  –  Loans  and  
Advances  at Amortised Cost Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3 /uni00A0 /uni00A0
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Loss allowance as at 01/01/2022  65,036  49,164  661,174  -  775,374 
Changes in the loss allowance  -  -  -  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 1  6,790  (4,187)  (2,603)  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 2  (246)  931  (685)  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 3  (690)  (34,413)  35,103  -  - 
––Increases due to change in credit risk  8,466  803  84,623  -  93,892 
Decreases due to change in credit risk  (5,745)  -  (23,968)  -  (29,713)
Write-o/uniFB00s  -  -  -  -  - 
Changes due to modiﬁcations that did 
not result in derecognition 1,933  9,562  6,908  -  18,403 
New ﬁnancial assets originated or purchased 37,598  29,835  633,328  -  700,761 
Financial assets that have been derecognised (26,627)  (5,514)  (75,762)  -  (107,903)
Changes in models/risk parameters  35,960  (3,817)  (290,432)  -  (258,289)
Foreign exchange and other movements  (16,588)  1,338  (126,620)  -  (141,870)
Loss allowance as at 31/12/2022  105,887  43,702  901,066  -  1,050,655 
Interbank Placements at Amortised Cost Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3 /uni00A0 /uni00A0
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
Gross carrying amount as at 01/01/2022  189,031  -  -  -  189,031 
Changes in the gross carrying amount  -  -  -  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 1  -  -  -  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 2  -  -  -  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 3  -  -  -  -  - 
––Changes   due   to   modiﬁcations   that   did   not   result   in derecognition -  -  -  -  - 
New ﬁnancial assets originated or purchased -  -  -  -  - 
Financial assets that have been derecognised -  -  -  -  - 
Write o/uniFB00  -  -  -  -  - 
Other changes  -  -  -  -  - 
Gross carrying amount as at 31/12/2022  189,031  -  -  -  189,031 
Loss allowance as at 31/12/2022  2,926  -  -  -  2,926 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
120Loss allowance – Interbank placement at 
Amortised Cost Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3 /uni00A0 /uni00A0
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Loss allowance as at 01/01/2022  2,926  -  -  -  2,926 
Changes in the loss allowance  -  -  -  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 1  -  -  -  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 2  -  -  -  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 3  -  -  -  -  - 
––Increases due to change in credit risk  -  -  -  -  - 
Decreases due to change in credit risk  -  -  -  -  - 
Write-o/uniFB00s  -  -  -  -  - 
Changes due to modiﬁcations that did  -  -  -  -  - 
not result in derecognition  -  -  -  -  - 
New ﬁnancial assets originated or purchased  -  -  -  -  - 
Financial assets that have been derecognised  -  -  -  -  - 
Changes in models/risk parameters  -  -  -  -  - 
Foreign exchange and other movements  -  -  -  -  - 
Loss allowance as at 31/12/2022  2,926  -  -  -  2,926 
O/uniFB00 Balance Sheet Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3 /uni00A0 /uni00A0
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
Gross carrying amount as at 01/01/2022  1,437,296  -  6,388  -  1,443,684 
Changes in the gross carrying amount  -  -  -  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 1  -  -  -  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 2  (15,278)  15,278  -  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 3  -  -  -  -  - 
––Changes   due   to   modiﬁcations   that   
did   not   result   in derecognition -  -  -  -  - 
New ﬁnancial assets originated or purchased  1,083,689  3,481  -  -  1,087,170 
Financial assets that have been derecognised  (891,721)  -  (6,388)  -  (898,109)
Write o/uniFB00  -  -  -  -  - 
Other changes  (2,909)  (9,849)  -  -  (12,758)
Gross carrying amount as at 31/12/2022  1,611,077  8,910  -  -  1,619,987 
Loss allowance as at 31/12/2022  32,515  960  -  -  33,475 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
121Loss allowance – O/uniFB00 Balance Sheet Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3 /uni00A0 /uni00A0
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Loss allowance as at 01/01/2022  33,473  -  1,232  -  34,705 
Changes in the loss allowance  -  -  -  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 2  (335)  335  -  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 3  -  -  -  -  - 
––Increases due to change in credit risk  2,840  568  .  -  3,408 
Decreases due to change in credit risk  (1,633)  .  .  -  (1,633)
Write-o/uniFB00s  -  -  -  -  - 
Changes due to modiﬁcations that did  -  -  -  -  - 
not result in derecognition  -  -  -  -  - 
New ﬁnancial assets originated or purchased  35,241  533  .  -  35,774 
Financial assets that have been derecognised  (23,139)  .  (1,232)  -  (24,371)
Changes in models/risk parameters  -  -  -  -  - 
Foreign exchange and other movements  (13,932)  (476)  .  -  (14,408)
Loss allowance as at 31/12/2022  32,515  960  -  -  33,475 
Bank
Debt investment securities at Amortised 
Cost Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3 /uni00A0 /uni00A0
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
Gross carrying amount as at 01/01/2022  9,707,421  -     -     -     9,707,421 
Changes in the gross carrying amount  -     -     -     -     -    
––Transfer to stage 1  -     -     -     -     -    
––Transfer to stage 2  (1,368,798)  1,368,798  -     -     -    
––Transfer to stage 3  (6,728,159)  -     6,728,159  -     -    
––Changes   due   to   modiﬁcations   that   did   not   result   in derecognition -     -     -     -     -    
New ﬁnancial assets originated or purchased  717,614  2,328,078  -     -     3,045,692 
Financial assets that have been derecognised  (2,328,078)  -     -     -     (2,328,078)
Write o/uniFB00  -     -     -     -     -    
Other changes  -     -     -     -     -    
Gross carrying amount as at 31/12/2022  -  3,696,876  6,728,159  -  10,425,035 
Loss allowance as at 31/12/2022  -  123,192  1,691,282  -  1,814,474 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
122Loss allowance – Debt investment securities at 
amortised cost Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3 /uni00A0 /uni00A0
 12-month 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  Lifetime 
ECL  POCI  Total 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Loss allowance as at 01/01/2022  -  -  -  -  - 
Changes in the loss allowance  -  -  -  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 1  -  -  -  -  - 
––Transfer to stage 2  -  86,775  -  -  86,775 
––Transfer to stage 3  -  -  1,691,282  -  1,691,282 
––Increases due to change in credit risk  -  -  .  -  - 
Decreases due to change in credit risk  -  .  .  -  - 
Write-o/uniFB00s  -  -  -  -  - 
Changes due to modiﬁcations that did  -  -  -  -  - 
not result in derecognition  -  -  -  -  - 
New ﬁnancial assets originated or purchased  -  36,417  .  -  36,417 
Financial assets that have been derecognised  -  .  -  -  - 
Changes in models/risk parameters  -  -  -  -  - 
Foreign exchange and other movements  -  -  .  -  - 
Loss allowance as at 31/12/2022  -  123,192  1,691,282  -  1,814,474 
Collateral held as security and other credit enhancements 
The Bank holds collateral or other credit enhancements to mitigate credit risk associated with ﬁnancial assets. 
The Bank did not hold any ﬁnancial instrument for which no loss allowance is recognised because of collateral at 31 December 2022. 
Personal lending
The Bank’s personal lending portfolio consists of secured and unsecured loans.
Corporate lending
The Group requests collateral and guarantees for corporate lending. The most relevant indicator of corporate customers’ creditworthiness is an analysis of their ﬁnancial performance and their liquidity, leverage, management e/uniFB00ectiveness and growth ratios. For this reason, the valuation of collateral held against corporate lending is not routinely updated. The valuation of such collateral is updated if the loan is put on the “watch list” and is therefore monitored more closely.
For credit impaired loans, the Group obtains appraisals of collateral to inform its credit risk management actions. The investment securities held by the Group are sovereign bonds and corporate bonds which are not 
collateralised, as well as asset backed securities which are secured by ﬁnancial assets.
b) Liquidity management risk 
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will not be able to meet payment obligations associated with ﬁnancial liabilities when they fall due and replace funds when they are withdrawn. The consequence may be the failure to meet obligations to repay depositors and fulﬁl commitments to lend. It is the policy of the Group to maintain Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
123adequate liquidity at all times and to be in a position to meet all obligations, repay depositors, fulﬁl commitments 
to lend and meet any other commitments as and when they fall due.
The management of liquidity risk is governed by the Bank’s liquidity policy. Responsibility for the management 
of liquidity risk lies with the Bank’s Assets and Liability Management Committee (ALCO), which is chaired by an Executive Director. ALCO is responsible for both statutory and prudential liquidity as well as compliance with regulatory requirements. 
The primary objective of liquidity risk management is to provide a planning mechanism for unanticipated 
changes in demand or needs for liquidity created by customer behaviour or abnormal market conditions.
ALCO emphasizes the maximization and preservation of customer deposits and other funding sources. ALCO 
also monitors deposit rates, levels, trends and signiﬁcant changes. 
Liquidity is managed on a short to medium-term basis. In the short term, the focus is on ensuring that cash ﬂow 
demands can be met as and when required. The focus, in the medium term, is on ensuring that the balance sheet remains structurally sound and aligned to the Bank’s strategy. 
A substantial portion of the Bank’s assets are funded by customer deposits made up of current and savings 
accounts and other deposits. These customer deposits, which are widely diversiﬁed by type and maturity represent a stable source of surplus funds. Lending is normally funded by liability in the same currency. 
The Bank also maintains signiﬁcant levels of marketable securities to meet compliance with prudential 
investment of surplus funds. ALCO oversees structural foreign currency and interest rate exposures that arise within the Bank. These responsibilities are coordinated by ALCO during monthly meetings. The Bank places low reliance on interbank funding and foreign markets.
The key measure used by the Group for managing liquidity risk is the ratio of net liquid assets to deposits from 
customers. For this purpose, net liquid assets include cash and cash equivalents and investment securities for which there is an active and liquid market less any deposits from banks, debt securities issued, other borrowings and commitments maturing within the next month. Details of the reported Bank’s ratio of net liquid assets to deposits from customers at the reporting date and during the reporting period were as follows:
2022 2021
% %
At 31  December 124.00% 58.39%
Average for the period 123.00% 65.39%
Maximum for the period 147.00% 75.21%
Minimum for the period 98.00% 48.03%
Maturity analysis for ﬁnancial assets and liabilities  
The Group manages liquidity risk. The primary objective of liquidity risk management is to provide a planning mechanism for unanticipated changes in demand or needs for liquidity created by customer behaviour or abnormal market conditions.
The amounts disclosed in the table are the remaining contractual undiscounted cash ﬂows which include 
estimated interest payment. Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
1242022  
GroupUp to 1 
month 1-3 months3-12 
months Over 1 year TotalCarrying 
Amount
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Financial liabilities by 
type
Non-derivative liabilities      
Deposits from customers  3,555,320  2,797,646  4,187,808  7,234,284  17,775,058  17,775,058 
Borrowings  296,358  47,537  470,273  189,000  1,003,168  1,003,168 
Other liabilities  -  -  254,236  -  254,236  254,236 
Financial guarantee contracts -  -  -  877,478  877,478  877,478 
Unrecognised loan commitments  90,347  184,834  402,470  145,963  823,614  823,614 
 3,942,025  3,030,017  5,314,787  8,446,725  20,733,554  20,733,554 
Financial assets by type 
Non-derivative assets
Cash and cash equivalents 4,476,878  -  -  -  4,476,878  4,476,878 
Advances to banks  40,084  -  -  189,031  229,115  229,115 
Investment securities  605,662  821,714  1,367,940  5,878,285  8,673,601  8,673,601 
Trading assets  38,639  74,518  154,555  8,280  275,992  275,992 
Loans and advances to customers  238,811  248,120  374,740  4,620,544  5,482,215  5,482,215 
Investment (other than securities) -  -  -  43,346  43,346  43,346 
Other asset  -  -  703,708  76,472  780,180  780,180 
Assets held for managing liquidity risk 
5,400,074  1,144,352  2,600,943  10,815,958  19,961,327  19,961,327 
Period liquidity gap  1,458,049 (1,885,665) (2,713,844)  2,369,233  (772,227)  (772,227)
2021 
GroupUp to 1 
month 1-3 months 3-12 months Over 1 year TotalCarrying 
Amount
Financial liabilities by type  
Non-derivative liabilities
Deposits from customers  2,582,711  3,105,940  6,017,676  2,195,790  13,902,117  13,902,117 
Borrowings  500,000  -  299,073  189,000  988,073  988,073 
Other liabilities  175,624  217,450  223,811  199,382  816,267  816,267 
Financial guarantee 
contracts  41,721  9,608  865,147  -  916,476  916,476 
Unrecognised loan commitments  19,490  12,699  479,210  134,027  645,426  645,426 
 3,319,546  3,345,697  7,884,917  2,718,199  17,268,359  17,268,359 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
1252021 
GroupUp to 1 
month 1-3 months 3-12 months Over 1 year TotalCarrying 
Amount
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Financial assets by type  
Non-derivative assets
Cash and cash equivalents  2,301,092  -  -  -  2,301,092  2,301,092 
Advances to banks  -  11,999  -  189,031  201,030  201,030 
Investment securities  218,667  661,313  1,279,637  7,606,223  9,765,840  9,765,840 
Trading assets  -  2,532  16,898  458,228  477,658  477,658 
Loans and advances to 
customers  708,802  575,114  988,010  2,034,454  4,306,380  4,306,380 
Investment (other than securities)  -  -  -  108,646  108,646  108,646 
Other asset  136,065  235,444  579,382  293,390  1,244,281  1,244,281 
Assets held for managing liquidity risk  3,364,626  1,486,402  2,863,927  10,689,972  18,404,927  18,404,927 
Period liquidity gap 45,080  (1,859,295) (5,020,990)  7,971,773  1,136,568  1,136,568 
2022  
BankUp to 1 month 1-3 months3-12 months
Over 1 year TotalCarrying 
Amount
Financial liabilities by type
Non-derivative liabilities      
Deposits from customers  2,797,646  4,187,808  7,250,620  3,555,320  17,791,394  17,791,394 
Borrowings  296,358  47,537  470,273  189,000  1,003,168  1,003,168 
Other liabilities  -  -  254,236  -  254,236  254,236 
Financial guarantee contracts  -  -  877,478  -  877,478  877,478 
Unrecognised loan commitments  184,834  402,470  145,963  90,347  823,614  823,614 
 3,278,838  4,637,815  8,998,570  3,834,667  20,749,890 20,749,890 
Financial assets by type 
Non-derivative assets  
Cash and cash equivalents 
4,476,878  -  -  -  4,476,878  4,476,878 
Advances to banks  40,084  -  -  189,031  229,115  229,115 
Investment securities  605,662  821,714  1,367,940  5,815,245  8,610,561  8,610,561 
Trading assets  38,639  74,518  154,555  8,280  275,992  275,992 
Loans and advances to customers  238,811  248,120  374,740  
4,620,544  5,482,215  5,482,215 
Investment (other than securities)  -  -  -  4,277  4,277  4,277 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
1262022  
BankUp to 1 
month 1-3 months3-12 months
Over 1 year TotalCarrying 
Amount
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Other assets  -  -  735,845  79,964  815,809  815,809 
Assets held for 
managing liquidity risk 
5,400,074  1,144,352  2,633,080  10,717,341  19,894,847  19,894,847 
Period liquidity gap  2,121,236 (3,493,463) (6,365,490)  6,882,674  (855,043)  (855,043)
 
2021 
GroupUp to 1 
month 1-3 months 3-12 months Over 1 year TotalCarrying 
Amount
Financial liabilities by type  
Non-derivative liabilities
Deposits from customers  2,582,711  3,105,940  6,017,676  2,206,928  13,913,255  13,913,255 
Borrowings  500,000  -  299,073  189,000  988,073  988,073 
Other liabilities  175,624  217,450  223,811  195,036  811,921  811,921 
Financial guarantee 
contracts  41,721  9,608  865,147  -  916,476  916,476 
Unrecognised loan commitments  19,490  12,699  479,210  134,027  645,426  645,426 
 3,319,546  3,345,697  7,884,917  2,724,991  17,275,151  17,275,151 
Financial assets by type
 
Non-derivative assets
Cash and cash equivalents  2,301,092  -  -  -  2,301,092  2,301,092 
Advances to banks  -  11,999  -  189,031  201,030  201,030 
Investment securities  218,667  661,313  1,279,637  7,547,804  9,707,421  9,707,421 
Trading assets  -  2,532  16,898  458,228  477,658  477,658 
Loans and advances to customers  708,802  575,114  988,010  2,034,454  4,306,380  4,306,380 
Investment (other than securities)  -  -  -  33,053  33,053  33,053 
Other asset  136,065  235,444  579,382  282,756  1,233,647  1,233,647 
Asset held for managing liquidity risk  3,364,626  1,486,402  2,863,927  10,545,326  18,260,281  18,260,281 
Period liquidity gap 45,080  (1,859,295) (5,020,990)  7,820,335  985,130  985,130 
The amounts in the table above have been compiled as follows:
• Non derivative ﬁnancial liabilities and ﬁnancial assets – undiscounted cash ﬂows, which include estimated 
interest payment
• Issued ﬁnancial guarantee contracts and unrecognised loan commitments – earliest possible contractual maturity. For issued ﬁnancial guarantee contracts, the maximum amount of the guarantee is allocated to the earliest period in which the guarantee could be called.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
127As part of the management of liquidity risk arising from ﬁnancial liabilities, the Group holds liquid assets 
comprising cash and cash equivalents and investments in government securities which can be readily sold to meet liquidity requirements.
In the normal course of business, assets are sometimes pledged for speciﬁc purposes. The table below sets out 
the availability of the Group’s ﬁnancial assets to support future funding.
GroupAvailable as 
collateralUnencumbered 
other* Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
31 Dec 2022Cash and cash equivalents  4,476,878  -  4,476,878 
Loans and advances to customers  -  5,482,215  5,482,215 
Advances to banks  229,115  -  229,115 
Investment securities  8,673,601  -  8,673,601 
Trading assets  275,992  -  275,992 
Investment (other than investment securities)  43,346  -  43,346 
Total assets  13,698,932  5,482,215  19,181,147 
Group31 Dec 2021Cash and cash equivalents  2,301,092  -  2,301,092 
Loans and advances to customers  -  4,306,253  4,306,253 
Advances to banks  201,030  -  201,030 
Investment securities  9,765,840  -  9,765,840 
Trading assets  477,658  -  477,658 
Investment (other than investment securities)  108,646  -  108,646 
Total assets  12,854,266  4,306,253  17,160,519 
BankAvailable as 
collateralUnencumbered 
other* Total
31 Dec 2022Cash and cash equivalents  4,476,878  -  4,476,878 
Loans and advances to customers  -  5,482,215  5,482,215 
Advances to banks  229,115  -  229,115 
Investment securities  8,610,561  -  8,610,561 
Trading assets  275,992  -  275,992 
Investment (other than investment securities)  4,277  -  4,277 
Total assets  13,596,823  5,482,215  19,079,038 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
128BankAvailable as 
collateralUnencumbered 
other* Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
31 Dec 2021Cash and cash equivalents  2,301,092  -  2,301,092 
Loans and advances to customers  -  4,306,253  4,306,253 
Advances to banks  201,030  -  201,030 
Investment securities  9,707,421  -  9,707,421 
Trading assets  477,658  -  477,658 
Investment (other than investment securities)  33,053  -  33,053 
Total assets  12,720,254  4,306,253  17,026,507 
*Represents assets that are not restricted for use as collateral, but the Group would not consider them as readily 
available to secure funding in the normal course of business.
Financial assets pledged as collateral
The Group pledged GHS 1.438b (2021: GHS 968.9m) of its investments in Government securities as collateral to Bank of Ghana, Development Bank Ghana, First Atlantic Bank, First National Bank, Akwapim Rural bank, NIB Bank, Stanbic Bank, Newmont PF and Ghana Hostels. The Group has not received collateral that it is permitted to sell or re-pledge in the absence of default.
c) Market Risk 
Management of Market Risk 
The Group takes on exposure to market risk, which is the risk of potential loss of earnings or economic value 
due to adverse changes in ﬁnancial market rates or prices. Market risks arise from open positions in interest rates, currency and equity products, all of which are exposed to general and speciﬁc market movements and changes in the level of volatility of market rates or prices such as interest rates, credit spreads, foreign exchange rates and equity prices. The Group’s exposure to market risk arises principally from customer-driven transactions and pension obligations.
Foreign Exchange Exposure 
Foreign exchange or currency risk is the risk of loss that results from changes in foreign exchange rates. The Bank’s exposure to foreign currency risk is limited to non-trading book and is strictly controlled by the Treasury and Risk Management units. Non-trading book refers to the assets of the Bank that are not traded or held with the intent of trading. The Group’s foreign exchange exposures are principally derived from customer-driven transactions.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
129The Group and The Bank EUR USD GBP
At 31 December 2022 ‘000 ‘000 ‘000
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents  18,270  83,146  8,661 
Advances to banks  3,120 
Loans and advances to customers  -  185,196 
Investment securities  31,820  2,742 
Total Assets  21,390  300,162  11,403 
LiabilitiesDeposits due to customers  16,674  249,404  6,590 
Total liabilities  16,674  249,404  6,590 
Net on balance sheet position  4,716  50,758  4,813 
O/uniFB00 balance sheet credit commitments  (32,465)  (116,731)  (1,218)
Total Exposure  (27,749)  (65,973)  3,595 
The Group and The Bank EUR USD GBP
At 31 December 2021 ‘000 ‘000 ‘000
AssetsCash and cash equivalents  10,389  11,594  4,100 
Advances to banks  -  528  - 
Loans and advances to customers  -  214,884  - 
Investment securities  -  -  - 
Total assets  10,389  227,006  4,100 
LiabilitiesDeposits from customers  15,132  213,837  5,899 
Total liabilities  15,132  213,837  5,899 
Net on-balance sheet position  (4,743)  13,169  (1,799)
O/uniFB00-balance sheet credit commitments  (6,940)  (181,711)  (26,700)
Total exposure  (11,683)  (168,542)  (28,499)
The following mid inter bank exchange rates were applied during the year:Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
130Average Rate Reporting Rate
GHS to 2022 2021 2022 2021
USD 1 8.4468 5.8177 8.5760 6.0061
EUR 1 8.8216 6.8654 9.1457 6.8281
GBP 1 10.2958 7.9962 10.3118 8.1272
Foreign Exchange Sensitivity
The following table shows the e/uniFB00ect of a strengthening or weakening of GHS against the currencies listed below 
on proﬁt or loss and equity. This sensitivity analysis indicates the potential impact on proﬁt or loss and equity based on foreign currency exposures recorded at 31 December (See “currency risk” above).
It does not represent actual or future gains or losses.A strengthening/weakening of the GHS by the rates shown in the table against the following currencies at 
31 December would have impacted equity and proﬁt or loss by the amounts shown below:
This analysis assumes that all other variables, in particular interest rates, remain constant. The analysis is 
performed on the same basis for 2021.
As at 31 Dec 2022 2021
In GHS % ChangeProﬁt or loss 
impact:
StrengtheningEquity impact:
Strengthening % ChangeProﬁt or loss 
impact:
StrengtheningEquity impact
Strengthening
USD ±1 13,887 13,887 ±1 25,292 25,292 
EUR ±1 3,223 3,223 ±1 2,148 2,148 
GBP ±1 612 612 ±1 69 69 
A 1% weakening of the GHS against the above currencies at 31 December would have had an equal but opposite e/uniFB00ect.
Interest Rate Risk 
Interest rate exposure 
Interest rate risk is the risk that future cash ﬂows or fair values of a ﬁnancial instrument will ﬂuctuate because 
of changes in market interest rates. The Group is exposed to the e/uniFB00ects of ﬂuctuations in the prevailing levels of market interest rates on both fair value and cash ﬂow risks. Interest margins may increase as a result of such changes which may cause losses to be incurred in the event of unexpected movements. 
The Asset and Liability Management (“ALM”) process, managed through ALCO, is used to manage interest rate 
risks associated with the non-trading book. Gap analysis is used in measuring interest rate risk. It compares the values of interest rate sensitive assets and liabilities that mature or are re-priced at various time periods in the future. Subjective judgment/assumptions are made about the behaviour of assets and liabilities which do not have speciﬁc contractual maturity or re-pricing dates.
Interest rate risk evaluates potential volatility to net interest income caused by changes in market interest rates 
and represents the most signiﬁcant market risk exposure to the Group’s non-trading book. The management of interest rate risk against interest rate gap limits is supplemented by monitoring sensitivity of the Group’s ﬁnancial assets and liabilities to various standard and non-standard interest rate scenarios.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
131Group 
At 31 December 2022 Up to 1 month 1-3 months 3- 12 months Over 1 year Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Assets
Investment securities  2,452,013  2,166,736  2,155,201  1,899,651  8,673,601 
Non-Pledged trading assets  38,639  74,518  154,555  8,280  275,992 
Advances to banks  40,084  -  -  189,031  229,115 
Loans and advances to 
customers  238,811  248,120  374,740  4,620,544  5,482,215 
Total ﬁnancial assets  2,769,547  2,489,374  2,684,496  6,717,506  14,660,923 
Liabilities
Interest bearing deposits  1,801,108  2,283,159  573,628  4,828,789  9,486,684 
Borrowings  296,358  47,537  470,273  189,000  1,003,168 
Total ﬁnancial liabilities  2,097,466  2,330,696  1,043,901  5,017,789  10,489,852 
Total interest rate gap  672,081  158,678  1,640,595  1,699,717  4,171,071 
2021 GroupAssetsInvestment securities  218,667  661,313  1,279,637  7,606,223  9,765,840 
Trading assets  -  2,532  16,898  458,228  477,658 
Advances to banks  -  11,999  -  189,031  201,030 
Loans and advances to 
customers  708,802  575,114  988,010  2,034,454  4,306,380 
Total ﬁnancial assets  927,469  1,250,958  2,284,545  10,287,936  14,750,908 
Liabilities
Interest bearing deposits  2,461,258  2,987,199  5,189,604  2,089,695  12,727,756 
Borrowings  500,000  -  299,073  189,000  988,073 
Total ﬁnancial liabilities  2,961,258  2,987,199  5,488,677  2,278,695  13,715,829 
Total interest gap  (2,033,789)  (1,736,241)  (3,204,132)  8,009,241  1,035,079 
Bank 
At 31 December 2022 Up to 1 month 1-3 months 3- 12 months Over 1 year Total
Assets
Investment securities  2,452,013  2,166,736  2,174,558  1,817,254  8,610,561 
Non-Pledged Trading Assets  38,639  74,518  154,555  8,280  275,992 
Advances to banks  40,084  -  -  189,031  229,115 
"Loans and advances to 
customers"  238,811  248,120  374,740  4,620,544  5,482,215 
Total ﬁnancial assets  2,769,547  2,489,374  2,703,853  6,635,109  14,597,883 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
132Bank 
At 31 December 2022 Up to 1 month 1-3 months 3- 12 months Over 1 year Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Liabilities
Interest bearing deposits  1,801,108  2,283,159  573,628  4,828,789  9,486,684 
Borrowings  296,358  47,537  470,273  189,000  1,003,168 
Total ﬁnancial liabilities  2,097,466  2,330,696  1,043,901  5,017,789  10,489,852 
Total interest rate gap  672,081  158,678  1,659,952  1,617,320  4,108,031 
2021 GroupAssetsInvestment securities  218,667  661,313  1,279,637  7,547,804  9,707,421 
Trading assets  -  2,532  16,898  458,228  477,658 
Advances to banks  -  11,999  -  189,031  201,030 
Loans and advances to 
customers  708,802  575,114  988,010  2,034,454  4,306,380 
Total ﬁnancial assets  927,469  1,250,958  2,284,545  10,229,517  14,692,489 
Liabilities
Interest bearing deposits  2,461,258  2,987,199  5,189,604  2,089,695  12,727,756 
Borrowings  500,000  -  299,073  189,000  988,073 
Total ﬁnancial liabilities  2,961,258  2,987,199  5,488,677  2,278,695  13,715,829 
Total interest rate gap  (2,033,789)  (1,736,241)  (3,204,132)  7,950,822  976,660 
Analysis of the Group’s sensitivity to market interest
Standard scenarios that are considered on a monthly basis include a 200 basis point (bp) parallel fall or rise in 
market interest rates. A change of a 200 basis points in interest rates at the reporting date would have impacted equity and proﬁt or loss by the amounts shown below:
Group 2022 2021
Increase Decrease Increase Decrease 
Interest income impact  143,576  (143,576)  295,016  (295,016)
Interest expense impact  (104,899)  104,899  (274,317)  274,317 
Net impact  38,677  (38,677)  20,699  (20,699)
Bank 2022 2021
Increase Decrease Increase Decrease 
Interest income impact 142,973  (142,973)  293,847  (293,847)
Interest expense impact (104,899)  104,899  (274,317)  274,317 
Net impact  38,074  (38,074)  19,530  (19,530)Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
133Market risk monitoring and control 
The Risk Management Division (RMD) is responsible for monitoring the Bank’s exposure to market risk. The 
analysis of impact of unlikely but plausible events by means of scenario analysis enables management to gain a better understanding of risks that the Bank is potentially exposed to under adverse conditions.
d) Operational risk
Operational risk is the risk of direct or indirect loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, systems or human factors, or from external events. Operational risk is inherent in the Group’s business activities and as with other risk types, is managed through an overall framework designed to balance strong corporate oversight with well-deﬁned independent risk management. The Group endeavours to minimize operational losses by ensuring that e/uniFB00ective infrastructure, controls, systems and individuals are in place throughout the organization. 
Operational Risk Framework 
To monitor, mitigate and control operational risk, the Group maintains a system of policies and has established a framework for assessing and communicating operational risks as well as the overall e/uniFB00ectiveness of the internal control environment across business lines. Each major business segment is expected to implement an operational risk process consistent with the requirements of this framework. The process for operational risk management includes the following steps: 
• identify and assess key operational risks; 
• establish key risk indicators; 
• produce comprehensive operational risk reports; and 
• prioritize and ensure adequate resources to actively improve the operational risk environment and mitigate emerging risks. 
The operational risk standards facilitate the e/uniFB00ective communication and mitigation actions both within and across businesses. The Group is committed to continuously enhancing its operational risk framework to encourage a culture of e/uniFB00ective accountability and responsibility.
e)  Compliance and regulatory risk
Compliance and Regulatory risk include the risk of non-compliance with regulatory requirements. The Group’s Compliance Department is responsible for establishing and maintaining an appropriate framework for the Group’s compliance with policies and procedures. Compliance with such policies and procedures is the responsibility of all managers. However, the Compliance Unit monitors and reports on compliance to Executive Management and the Board. The Group generally complied with regulatory requirements.
f)  Capital management
GCB Bank is subject to regulatory capital rules as set out in Bank of Ghana’s Capital Requirement Directive (CRD) which addresses capital adequacy and provides minimum capital requirements.
Capital Structure
Under the CRD, total capital consists of two tiers of capital, Tier 1 and Tier 2. Tier 1 capital is further composed 
of CET1 capital and additional tier 1 capital. CET1 capital primarily includes common equity, retained earnings and statutory reserve. Goodwill, intangible assets and deferred tax assets are excluded from CET1 capital. Additional tier 1 capital includes qualifying non-cumulative preference shares. Tier 2 capital consists of qualifying subordinated debt and a limited portion of unaudited proﬁt. The central bank reduced the capital conservation bu/uniFB00er from 3% to 0% as a regulatory forbearance for banks participating in the domestic debt exchange programme.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
134Risk-Weighted Assets
Risk-weighted assets are calculated using the standardised approach which includes measures of credit risk, 
market risk and operational risk.  Credit risk-weighted assets are based on pre-deﬁned risk weighted for credit exposures. Market risk capital charges are determined by applying prescribed risk weightings to positions held as of the reporting date. Operational risk charges are based on beta factors on income from business lines.
Capital AdequacyThe Bank manages its capital position to ensure its capital is adequate to support its business activities and 
aligns with its risk appetite and strategic planning. Additionally, the Bank seeks to maintain safety and soundness at all times, take advantage of organic growth opportunities, meet obligations to counterparties and satisfy current and future regulatory capital requirements. 
Capital management is integrated in our risk and governance processes, as capital is a key consideration in the 
development of our strategic plan, risk appetite and risk limits.
We conduct an Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP) periodically which is a forward-looking 
assessment of our projected capital needs and resources, incorporating earnings, balance sheet and risk forecasts under baseline and adverse economic and market conditions. We utilize periodic stress tests to assess the potential impacts to our balance sheet, earnings, regulatory capital and liquidity under a variety of stress scenarios. 
The capital management function is governed primarily by management-level committees that oversee the 
risks associated with capital management, namely the Bank’s asset and liability committee (ALCO) and the executive committee
Regulatory ReliefsThe Ghana Domestic Debt Exchange Program has signiﬁcantly impacted the bank’s capital levels due to 
expected credit losses of government bonds. See Note 15b.
The Bank of Ghana has however provided regulatory forbearances to help preserve ﬁnancial stability within the 
banking industry. Key reliefs granted by the regulator include the following: 
1. Reduction of Capital Conservation Bu/uniFB00er from 3% to zero, e/uniFB00ectively reducing the minimum Capital 
Adequacy Ratio (CAR) from 13% to 10%.
2. Derecognition losses (ECL) emanating from the Debt Exchange shall be spread equally over a period of four 
(4) years for the purposes of CAR computation.
3. Banks have a maximum of three (3) years to restore the minimum paid-up capital as a result of any capital 
shortfall arising solely from the derecognition losses
4. Increase in Tier II component of regulatory capital from 2% to 3% of Total Risk-Weighted Assets (RWA)
5. Reduction of minimum Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital from 6.5% to 5.5% of RWA
6. Increase in an allowable portion of property revaluation gains for Tier II capital computation from 50% to 60%
7. Risk weights attached to New Bonds to be set at 0% for CAR computation, and at 100% for Old Bonds
A total amount of GHS1.8bn was recorded as impairment losses on government bonds due to the DDEP of which GHS 1.7bn directly relates to the eligible bonds. In line with the regulatory forbearance above, the bank’s capital adequacy computation takes account of impairment losses of GHS423m representing 25% of the total ECL recorded on the eligible bonds.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
1352022 2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Tier 1 Capital
Stated capital ordinary  500,000  500,000  500,000  500,000 
Statutory reserve  639,555  639,555  639,555  639,555 
Retained earnings  2,014,679  2,090,577  1,434,337  1,547,835 
Intangible/other assets  (115,028)  (123,752)  (167,999)  (168,226)
Deferred tax assets  (757,825)  (758,124)  (237,927)  (238,171)
Investments in capital of other Banks and ﬁnancial 
/ other institutions (35,551)  (136,124)  (33,054)  (99,081)
Total qualifying tier 1 capital  2,245,830  2,212,132  2,134,912  2,181,912 
Tier 2 Capital
Fair value reserves  267  21,030  (106)  14,997 
Other reserves  (39,375)  16,350  (26,754)  (3,916)
Total qualifying tier 2 capital  (39,108)  37,380  (26,860)  11,081 
Total regulatory capital  2,206,722  2,249,512  2,108,052  2,192,993 
Risk proﬁle
Total credit risk equivalent weighted asset (RWA)  7,834,534  7,800,033  6,354,165  6,364,329 
Total operational risk equivalent weighted asset 
(RWA) 4,467,851  4,467,851  3,597,938  3,597,938 
"Total market risk equivalent weighted asset (RWA)" 55,386  55,386 
 133,814  133,814 
Total RWA  12,357,771  12,323,270  10,085,917  10,096,081 
Regulatory Quantitative Disclosures
Capital Adequacy Ratio 17.86% 18.25% 20.90% 21.72%
Non-Performing Loans Ratio 20.59% 20.59% 15.98% 15.98%
Liquid Ratio 69.66% 70.28% 64.00% 65.00%
Compliance with Statutory Liquidity(i) Default in Statutory Liquidity  -  - 
 220  220 
(ii) Default in Statutory Sanction Nil Nil Nil Nil
The Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) has been computed in accordance with the Capital Requirement Directive 
(CRD) by Bank of Ghana. The CRD was developed and issued by Bank of Ghana for the adoption of all banks in Ghana. It is based on the Basel II and III frameworks.
Non- performing loans
2022 2021
Non-Performing Loans (Sub-standard to Loss) 1,351,917 817,997
NPL Ratio (Non-performing loans/ total gross loans) 20.59% 15.98%Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
136g)  Renegotiated loans which have been reclassiﬁed
Loans renegotiated and reclassiﬁed during the year amounted to GHS 418,067,060
h)  Amount of repossessed properties/collateral
No collateral was repossessed during the year. (2021: Nil)
i) Statutory breaches and non-compliance with other prudential requirements;
The Bank did not record a liquidity breach during the period under review. 
7. Fair values of ﬁnancial instruments 
The fair values of ﬁnancial assets and ﬁnancial liabilities that are traded in active markets are based on quoted 
market prices or dealer price quotations. For all other ﬁnancial instruments, the Group determines fair values using other valuation techniques.
For ﬁnancial instruments that trade infrequently and have little price transparency, fair value is less objective 
and require varying degrees of judgment depending on liquidity, concentration, uncertainty of market factors, pricing assumptions and other risks a/uniFB00ecting the speciﬁc instrument.
(a) Valuation models
The Group measures fair values using the methods which reﬂects the signiﬁcance of inputs used in making the measurements.
The objective of valuation techniques is to arrive at a fair value measurement that reﬂects the price that would 
be received to sell the asset or paid to transfer the liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. 
The Group uses widely recognised valuation models for determining the fair value of common and more simple 
ﬁnancial instruments that use only observable market data and require little management judgment and estimation.
Availability of observable market prices and model inputs reduces the need for management judgment and 
estimation and also reduces the uncertainty associated with determining fair values. Availability of observable market prices and inputs varies depending on the products and markets and is prone to changes based on speciﬁc events and general conditions in the ﬁnancial markets.
Fair Valuation of Government of Ghana Bonds
Valuation techniques
Investments of eligible bonds have been fair valued at the end of the year due to the Ghana Domestic Debt 
Exchange Programme. See note 15b.
The price of bonds is typically measured using techniques that fall under the market approach and/ or the 
income approach. The valuation approaches that may be considered include:
1. Market ApproachThis valuation approach uses the prices and other relevant information generated by market transaction 
involving identical or comparable instruments. Under this approach, the price of the new bonds is based on either: 
- the price of a bond from quoted prices on the bond market or stock exchange by a comparable issuer, or- the price of a similar bond issued by a comparable issuer on an unquoted market. Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
137This approach may not be appropriate to be used by the bank in valuing the new bonds because there is no 
principal or advantageous market for these bonds since they come to replace all Government bonds currently on the market.
2. Income ApproachThis valuation technique converts future cash ﬂows or income streams to a discounted amount. The value is 
determined on the basis of the value indicated by current market expectations about those future amounts, discounted to their present value. The common technique under the income approach that is used to measure the value of unquoted bonds is the discounted cash ﬂow method (present value technique). 
Under this method, the value of the bond is measured by discounting the estimated future cash ﬂows of the 
bond using a rate of return that comprises the time value of money and the risks of the investment such as, credit risk, liquidity risk and other risks. This is based on assumptions that are inherently uncertain because they reﬂect estimates of the future rather than known amounts. Even contractual cash ﬂows that may appear certain at ﬁrst glance contain risk because of uncertainty about the ability of the counterparty to meet its contractual obligations. For example, contractual cash ﬂows of a bond is subject to a risk of default. A risk premium is therefore included in the fair value measurement to reﬂect the amount that risk-averse market participants would demand to be compensated for the uncertainty of the cash ﬂows.
An active market is yet to develop for the new bonds thus the discounted cash ﬂow method under the income 
approach would be a more suitable valuation approach for determining the fair value of the new bonds.
The two approaches to applying a discounted cash ﬂow method:
• The discount rate adjustment technique 
This technique requires discounting the contractual or promised cash ﬂows using a risk-adjusted rate. These 
cash ﬂows are conditional upon the occurrence of speciﬁed events (e.g. contractual or promised cash ﬂows for a bond are conditional on the event of no default by the debtor). The discount rate used in the discount rate adjustment technique is derived from observed rates of return for comparable assets or liabilities that are traded in the market. Accordingly, the contractual, promised or most likely cash ﬂows are discounted at an observed or estimated market rate for such conditional cash ﬂows (i.e. a market rate of return) 
• The expected present value technique 
This technique requires discounting either: 
- Method 1- the risk-adjusted expected cashﬂows using a risk-free rate, or
- Method 2 - the non-risk adjusted expected cash ﬂows using a risk-adjusted rate (this rate is di/uniFB00erent from 
the rate used in the discount rate adjustment technique).
This technique uses as a starting point a set of cash ﬂows that represents the probability-weighted average of 
all possible future cash ﬂows (i.e., the expected cash ﬂows). The resulting estimate is identical to expected value, which, in statistical terms, is the weighted average of a discrete random variable’s possible values with the respective probabilities as the weights. Because all possible cash ﬂows are probability-weighted, the resulting expected cash ﬂow is not conditional upon the occurrence of any speciﬁed event (unlike the cash ﬂows used in the discount rate adjustment technique). In theory, the present value (i.e. the fair value) of the asset’s cash ﬂows is the same whether determined using Method 1 or Method 2. When using an expected present value technique to measure fair value, either Method 1 or Method 2 could be used. The selection of Method 1 or Method 2 will depend on facts and circumstances speciﬁc to the asset or liability being measured, the extent to which su/uniFB03cient data are available and the judgements applied.
The technique observed to be commonly used by banks in Ghana for valuing government bonds is the discount 
rate adjustment technique whereby the contractual cashﬂows are discounted using yields available from the bond market. Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
138The bank discounted the contractual cash ﬂows of the new bond using a yield to maturity calculated from the 
market yields of the old bonds at date of measurement. 
The yield to maturity of the old bonds is considered the appropriate discount rate since it currently reﬂects the 
risks and uncertainty associated with the Government of Ghana and it maximises the use of relevant observable inputs and minimise the use of unobservable inputs. In determining the yield to maturity, banks should consider the suitability of old bonds based on their proximity of the maturity date to the respective new bond to be priced. 
b) Valuation framework
The objective of a fair value measurement is to estimate the price at which an orderly transaction to sell the asset or transfer the liability would take place between market participants at the measurement date under current market conditions. A fair value measurement requires an entity to determine all the following:
• The particular asset or liability that is the subject of measurement (consistently with the unit of account);
• The principal (or most advantageous) market for the asset or liability;
• The valuation technique(s) appropriate for the measurement, considering the availability of data with which to develop inputs that represent the assumptions that market participants would use when pricing the asset or liability and the level of the fair value hierarchy within which the inputs are categorized.   
                 2022        2021
                 Level 1  Level 1
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Investment in equity securities  3,873  42,345  3,196  4,903 
Non-pledged trading  asset  275,992  275,992  477,658  477,658 
 279,865  318,337  480,854  482,561 
                2022  2021
                Level 3  Level 3
Bank Group Bank Group
Investment in unlisted equity securities  404  1,001  584  22,861 
 404  1,001  584  22,861 
Bank Level 2 Level 3 Total
Investment securities  2,096,954  8,328,081  10,425,035 
 2,096,954  8,328,081  10,425,035 
Group Level 2 Level 3 Total
Investment securities  2,118,191  8,386,618  10,504,809 
 2,118,191 8,386,618  10,504,809 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
139Valuation Technique
The Income approach was used for the valuation of the unlisted equities. The Dividend Growth and the Book 
Value methods speciﬁcally were adopted for the purposes of the valuation.
The discounted cash ﬂow technique was used in the valuation of the debt instruments.
Main inputs and assumptions
Level 2 and level 3 inputs were deployed in the valuation.The following information were used:
• Dividend Income of the entities being valued.
• Beta of all shares listed on the GSE from the Bloomberg Terminal. The average beta for entities similar to the 
ones being valued was used to value the respective investee company.
• Market rate of return, using the GSE Composite Index as a proxy.
• The discount rate of 15.70% was used for the valuation of Government of Ghana bonds
Sensitivity Analysis
Bank Changes-if-discount-rates
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
+5% -5%
Loss impact  (171,000)  190,000 
 (171,000)  190,000  
Group Changes-if-discount-rates
+5% -5%
Loss impact (172,434) 191,524 
(172,524) 191,524 
 
7i.  Financial instruments not measured at fair value
The carrying amount of the ﬁnancial instruments not measured at fair value approximate their fair values.
7ii. Classiﬁcation of ﬁnancial assets and ﬁnancial liabilities
Accounting classiﬁcations and fair values
The table below sets out the Group’s classiﬁcation of each class of ﬁnancial assets and liabilities. Fair value is the 
price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date in the principal or in its absence, the most advantageous market to which the Group has access at that date.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
140BankFair value 
through proﬁt 
or lossAmortised 
costFair value 
through OCIFinancial 
liabilitiesTotal 
carrying 
amount
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
31 December, 2022Cash and cash equivalents  -  4,476,878  -  -  4,476,878 
Investment securities  -  8,610,561  -  -  8,610,561 
Trading Assets  275,992  -  -  275,992 
Advances to banks  -  229,115  -  -  229,115 
Loans and advances to customers  -  5,482,215  -  -  5,482,215 
Investments (other than 
investment securities)  -  -  4,277  -  4,277 
Other assets  -  815,810  -  -  815,810 
Total assets  275,992  19,614,579  4,277  -  19,894,848 
Deposits from banks & other ﬁnancial institutions  -  -  -  259,147  259,147 
Deposits from customers  -  -  -  17,532,247  17,532,247 
Other liabilities  -  -  -  254,236  254,236 
Borrowings  -  -  -  1,003,168  1,003,168 
Total liabilities  -  -  - 19,048,798  19,048,798 
BankFair value 
through proﬁt 
or lossAmortised 
costFair value 
through OCIFinancial 
liabilitiesTotal 
carrying 
amount
31 December, 2021
Cash and cash equivalents  -  2,301,092  -  -  2,301,092 
Investment securities  -  9,707,421  -  -  9,707,421 
Trading assets  477,658  -  -  -  477,658 
Advances to banks  -  201,030  -  -  201,030 
Loans and advances to customers  -  4,306,381  -  -  4,306,381 
Investment (other than investment 
securities)  -  -  3,779  -  3,779 
Other assets  -  527,263  -  -  527,263 
Total assets  477,658  17,043,187  3,779  -  17,524,624 
Deposits from banks & other ﬁnancial institutions  -  -  -  747,589  747,589 
Deposits from customers  -  -  -  13,165,666  13,165,666 
Other liabilities  -  -  -  643,878  643,878 
Borrowings  -  -  -  988,073  988,073 
Total liabilities  -  -  - 15,545,206  15,545,206 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
141GroupFair value 
through proﬁt 
or lossAmortised 
costFair value 
through OCIFinancial 
liabilitiesTotal 
carrying 
amount
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
31 December, 2022Cash and cash equivalents  -  4,476,878  -  -  4,476,878 
Investment securities  -  8,673,601  -  -  8,673,601 
Trading Assets  275,992  -  -  275,992 
Advances to banks  -  229,115  -  -  229,115 
Loans and advances to customers  -  5,482,215  -  -  5,482,215 
Investments (other than 
investment securities)  -  -  43,346  -  43,346 
Other assets  -  780,180  -  -  780,180 
Total assets  275,992  19,641,989  43,346  -  19,961,327 
Deposits from banks & other ﬁnancial institutions  -  -  -  259,147  259,147 
Deposits from customers  -  -  -  17,515,911  17,515,911 
Other liabilities  -  -  -  254,236  254,236 
Borrowings  -  -  -  1,003,168  1,003,168 
Total liabilities  -  -  -  19,032,462  19,032,462 
GroupFair value 
through proﬁt 
or lossAmortised 
costFair value 
through OCIFinancial 
liabilitiesTotal 
carrying 
amount
31 December, 2021
Cash and cash equivalents  -  2,314,179  -  -  2,314,179 
Investment securities  -  9,765,840  -  -  9,765,840 
Trading assets  476,870  -  -  -  476,870 
Advances to banks  -  201,030  -  -  201,030 
Loans and advances to customers  -  4,306,381  -  -  4,306,381 
Investment (other than investment 
securities)  -  -  26,366  -  26,366 
Other assets  -  536,553  -  -  536,553 
Total  476,870  17,123,983  26,366  -  17,627,219 
Deposits from banks & other ﬁnancial institutions  -  -  -  747,589  747,589 
Deposits from customers  -  -  -  13,165,666  13,165,666 
Other liabilities  -  -  -  648,225  648,225 
Borrowings  -  -  -  988,073  988,073 
Total liabilities  -  -  -  15,549,553  15,549,553 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
1428. Operating segments
a. Segment information
For performance management purposes, the Bank is organized into 4 core segments based on their products 
and services. These are:
• Retail Banking;
• Corporate Banking; 
• Treasury; and
• Commercial Banking
The Retail Banking arm of the business concentrates mainly on individual customers and therefore provides the required platform to enhance service delivery to that segment. The coverage of this function also extends to sole proprietorships and very small and medium scale enterprises.
Corporate Banking is responsible for the top tier Business Banking customers. The function is sub categorized 
into Multinational Corporate, Large Local Corporate, Development Organizations and Public Sector. Depending on customer proﬁling, clients of this function are mostly relationship managed with a few of them managed on portfolio basis.
The Treasury function provides the expertise and platform for the centralized management of the Group’s 
market risk exposures. The function manages the funding requirements and ensures that the Bank is well capitalized to boost investor conﬁdence and sustain future development of the business.
The Commercial Banking arm of the business provides banking services by way of ﬁnancing and raising deposit 
as well as providing trade services to these small-scale clients.
For the purpose of segmental reporting, surplus funds or deﬁcit per business unit is either sold to or purchased 
from the Bank pool based on a pool rate determined by Treasury using the Group’s incremental cost of funds for both local and foreign currencies.
Management monitors the operating results of business segments separately for the purpose of making 
decisions about capital allocation and for assessing performance. Segment performance is evaluated based on operating proﬁt or loss together with the underlying balance sheet position for the reporting period. To be able to assess each of the three businesses in a fairer and consistent manner, common corporate operating expenses are allocated to segments based on an established cost sharing policy that permits a reasonable and consistent allocation of central management expenses.
31 Dec 2022 Retail Corporate Treasury Commercial Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
External RevenueNet interest income  347,595  71,093  1,651,722  21,389  2,091,799 
Inter-segment revenue  668,968  304,610  (1,091,097)  117,519  - 
Net fees and commission 
income  220,008  114,728  -  37,858  372,594 
Net trading income  -  155,507  227,725  103,994  487,226 
Other income/other revenue  8,690  3,526  3,512  4,064  19,792 
Total segment revenue  1,245,261  649,464  791,862  284,824  2,971,411 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
14331 Dec 2022 Retail Corporate Treasury Commercial Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Operating expenses  (839,690)  (315,196)  (182,322)  (251,930)  (1,589,138)
Other material non-cash 
items:
Impairment loss on loans/
advances and securities  (37,545)  (225,406)  (1,814,474)  (11,100)  (2,088,525)
Reportable segmental proﬁt before tax  368,026  108,862  (1,204,934)  21,794  (706,252)
Reportable segment assets  2,731,274  2,246,061  8,350,983  178,175  13,506,493 
Reportable segment liabilities  9,674,848  6,538,135  596,101  1,578,412  18,387,496 
31 Dec 2021 Retail Corporate Treasury Commercial Total
External revenue
Net interest income  167,636  86,377  1,610,796  20,028  1,884,837 
Inter-segment revenue  592,492  191,044  (924,808)  141,272  - 
Net fees and commissions  213,667  73,084  11,266  41,642  339,659 
Net trading income  -  11,357  136,216  9,967  157,540 
Other income / other revenue  805  10,419  3,029  (4,677)  9,576 
Total segment revenue  974,600  372,281  836,499  208,232  2,391,612 
Operating expenses  (650,527)  (240,398)  (145,560)  (220,522)  (1,257,007)
Other material non-cash 
items:  -  -  -  -  - 
Impairment loss on loans and advances  (11,994)  (259,279)  -  (53,527)  (324,800)
Reportable segmental proﬁt before tax  312,079  (127,396)  690,939  (65,817)  809,805 
Reportable segment assets  1,840,728  2,191,964  12,253,757  273,561  16,560,010 
Reportable segment liabilities  7,442,431  4,638,910  925,573  1,899,414  14,906,328 
b. Reconciliations of information on reportable segment
i. Assets
2022 2021
Total assets for reportable entities  13,506,493  16,560,010 
Unallocated amounts  7,850,628  1,700,271 
Total assets  21,357,121  18,260,281 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
144ii. Liabilities
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2022 2021
Total liabilities for reportable entities  18,387,496  14,906,328 
Unallocated amounts  1,123,139  800,128 
Total liabilities  19,510,635  15,706,456 
Note
c. Geographic information
In Ghana Outside Ghana Total
2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021
Revenues  2,971,411 2,391,612  -     -     2,971,411 2,391,612
No individual customer contributed 10% or more to revenue. Segment revenue is based on the geographical 
location of customers, whilst segment asset is based on the geographical location of assets.
In Ghana Outside Ghana Total
2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021
Non-current assets
Property, equipment and right 
-of- use asset  428,550 301,332  -     -     428,550 301,332 
Intangible assets  115,028 168,225  -     -     115,028 168,225 
Total  543,578  469,557  -     -     543,578  469,557 
9. Interest income
                 2022        2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Cash and short term funds 54,153 54,144 31,607 31,603
Investment securities 1,724,424 1,738,749 1,598,704 1,608,621
Loans and advances to customers1,035,228 1,036,552 739,146 739,146
2,813,805 2,829,445 2,369,457 2,379,370
10. Interest expense on ﬁnancial liabilities measured at amortised cost
                 2022        2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost
Current and savings accounts 255,270 255,270 205,144 205,144
Time and other deposits323,630 323,630 227,631 227,631
Borrowings143,106 143,043 51,845 51,752
722,006 721,943 484,620 484,527Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
14511. Fee and commission income
                 2022        2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Commission on letters of credit and guarantees 18,140 18,140 15,366 15,366
Commission on foreign services 47,837 47,837 30,594 30,594
Commission on turnover63,249 63,230 55,328 55,326
Processing and facility fees72,884 72,884 68,462 68,462
Other fees and commissions 237,114 256,225 220,658 240,529
Total Fee and Commission Income 439,224 458,316 390,408 410,277
Other fees and commissions include earnings from payment orders, bancassurance, mobile ﬁnancial services 
and money transfers.
12. Fee and commission expense
                 2022        2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Direct cost of services 66,630 73,310 50,749 50,749
Total 66,630 73,310 50,749 50,749
13. Net trading income
                 2022        2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Foreign exchange 277,541 277,541 84,983 84,983
Fixed income trading 209,685 209,685 72,557 72,557
487,226 487,226 157,540 157,540
Other foreign exchange di/uniFB00erences arising on non-trading activities are taken to other operating income/expense in the statement of proﬁt or loss and other comprehensive income.
14. Other operating income
                 2022        2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Dividend income  2,697  8,838 571 6,578
Bad debt recoveries  -  - 584 584
(Proﬁt)/Loss on sale of property and equipment  315  315 137 137
Rental income  377  377 709 709
Others  16,403  16,403 7,575 7,574
19,792 25,933 9,576 15,582Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
146Summary of the Impairment assessment are disclosed below;
15a. Net impairment loss on loans and advances
                 2022        2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Impairment charge  274,051  274,051  324,800  324,800 
Analysis of impairment charge
Allowance for impairment – loans and advances  274,051  274,051  324,800  324,800 
15b. Net impairment loss on investment securities
                 2022        2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Impairment charge  1,814,474  1,831,208  -  - 
Analysis of impairment chargeAllowance for impairment – Investment Securities  1,814,474  1,831,208  -  - 
The government of Ghana announced a Debt exchange program during the last quarter of 2022, under the 
program, the Government of Ghana, ESLA and Daakye Bonds (eligible bonds) outstanding as at 31 December 2022 was to be exchanged for a new set of Bonds with terms speciﬁed by the Government. Though the announcement of the exchange occurred during the year under review, the exchange of the bonds occurred after the year end. Management has therefore assessed for the modiﬁcation of the bonds during the subsequent period as required by IFRS 9.
The Bank subjected the eligible old bonds to speciﬁc Expected Credit Loss assessment in accordance with IFRS 
9. In the assessment, the bank determined the eligible bonds as credit impaired. The default by the obligor, the issue of the new bonds with a signiﬁcantly lower coupons and the modiﬁcation of the tenure qualiﬁes the instruments as originated credit impaired. 
In assessing the impairment, the credit impaired ﬁnancial asset carries a probability of Default (PD) of 100%. 
The bank determined the cashﬂows from the new bonds as the collateral for the old eligible bonds, this was used in the determination of the Loss Given Default (LGD). This was fair valued using the discounted cashﬂow technique in accordance with the requirement of IFRS 13. 
The discount rate used for the valuation of the bonds at 31 December 2022 was determined to be the weighted 
average of the yield to maturity of the old eligible bonds.
The carrying amount of the eligible bonds was compared to the fair values determined using the discounted 
cashﬂows and the di/uniFB00erence was deemed as impairment loss on the eligible bonds.
The debt exchange did not result in the transfer of cash to or from the government, hence there is no impact of 
the debt exchange on cashﬂows.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
14716. Other expenses 
             2022 2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Technology and communication  205,674  210,087  149,045  149,045 
Advertising and marketing  4,100  6,748  7,598  7,598 
Training  9,258  9,378  4,794  4,794 
Audit fees  2,491  2,571  1,980  2,050 
Donations  11,242  11,243  2,331  2,331 
Utilities  32,940  32,971  28,786  28,812 
Other professional fees  63,007  63,664  74,055  75,328 
Rent and rates  9,691  9,691  7,330  7,340 
Printing, Stationery & Publication  17,231  17,231  9,258  9,258 
Repairs and maintenance  33,104  33,149  15,863  15,889 
Security services  19,653  19,653  17,318  17,318 
Travelling  6,031  6,137  2,735  2,740 
Cash Collection  33,829  33,829  24,720  24,720 
Premium-Ghana Deposit Protection Scheme  38,494  38,494  28,443  28,443 
Business promotion  6,184  6,275  2,515  2,515 
Settlement of legal cases  8,498  8,498  (2,412)  (2,412)
Bad debt written o/uniFB00  4,572  4,572  -  - 
Cleaning  9,072  9,098  7,659  7,677 
Outsourced Services  27,399  27,399  21,213  21,488 
Other administrative expenses  104,601  125,456  68,289  68,791 
 647,071  676,144  471,520  473,725 
Other administrative expenses include general administration expenses, covid-19 expenses, correspondence 
bank charges, subscription fees etc.
17. Personnel expenses  
                 2022        2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Sta/uniFB00 expense comprise:
Wages and salaries  282,758  286,494  229,530  233,603 
Sta/uniFB00 allowances  250,903  251,131  190,748  190,748 
Performance award  112,310  112,478  100,217  100,217 
Social security fund contributions  34,056  34,111  29,802  29,802 
Provident fund contributions  31,429  31,481  27,959  27,959 
Retirement beneﬁt obligations  22,303  22,303  20,995  20,995 
Restructuring cost  7,315  7,315  96  96 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
148                 2022        2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Other sta/uniFB00 costs  52,375  52,479  35,430  35,471 
Directors fees  3,544  3,801  2,539  2,664 
 796,993  801,593  637,316  641,555 
18. Income tax expense
2022 2021
Amount recognised in proﬁt or loss Bank Group Bank Group
Current tax expense     
Corporate tax  372,093  376,960  261,416  267,969 
National Fiscal Stabilisation Levy  -     -     40,490  40,490 
Financial Sector Recovery Levy  -     -     30,368  30,368 
 372,093  376,960  332,274   338,827 
Deferred tax expense  (522,547)  (527,021)  (79,136)  (79,133)
Total income tax expense  (150,454)  (150,061)  253,138  259,694 
Reconciliation of the tax expense   
The tax charge on the Group and Bank’s proﬁt before tax di/uniFB00ers from the theoretical amount that would arise 
using the basic tax rate as follows:
2022 2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Proﬁt before tax  (706,252)  (743,459)  809,805  842,372 
Corporate tax rate 25% 25% 25% 25%
National ﬁscal stabilisation levy rate 5% 5% 5% 5%
Financial sector recovery levy rate 5% 5% 5% 5%
Tax calculated at corporate tax rate  (176,563)  (185,865)  202,451  210,593 
Deductible Income  (3,822)  (6,119)  (19,680)  (19,639)
Tax exempt income  -  11,869  (313)  (2,701)
Assessed Loss  -  -  - 
Disallowed expenses  29,931  30,054  -  - 
Income subject to tax at di/uniFB00erent rate  -  -  (178)  (178)
National Fiscal Stabilisation Levy  -  -  40,490  40,490 
Financial Sector Stabilization Levy  -  -  30,368  30,368 
Current income tax charge  (150,454)  (150,061)  253,138  258,933 
E/uniFB00ective tax rate 22.74% 22.00% 31.26% 30.83%Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)
17. Personnel expenses (continued) GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
14919. Current tax (assets) / liabilities
The movement on the current tax account was as follows:
Group 
2022Balance at 
1 January Charge for 
the year Payment Balance at 
31 December 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Year of assessment
Up to 2021  37,385  10,799  (22,819)  25,365 
2022  -  376,960  (334,725)  42,235 
National Fiscal Stabilization Levy  14,397  (10,870)  (41,578)  (38,051)
Financial Sector Recovery Levy  4,536  -  (40,065)  (35,529)
Tax adjustment related to prior year  (71)  71  -  - 
 56,247  376,960  (439,187)  (5,980)
Group 
2021Balance at 
1 January Charge for 
the year Payment Balance at 
31 December 
Year of assessment
Up to 2020  (34,087)  -  -  (34,087)
2021  -  267,969  (196,497)  71,472 
National Fiscal Stabilization Levy  8,350  40,490  (34,443)  14,397 
Financial Sector Recovery Levy  -  30,368  (25,832)  4,536 
Tax adjustment related to prior year  (71)  -  -  (71)
 (25,808)  338,827  (256,772)  56,247 
Bank 
2022Balance at 
1 January Charge for 
the year Payment Balance at 
31 December 
Year of assessment
Up to 2021  35,718  10,799  (22,777)  23,740 
2022  -  372,093  (329,071)  43,022 
National Fiscal Stabilization Levy  14,397  (10,870)  (41,578)  (38,051)
Financial Sector Recovery Levy  4,536  -  (40,065)  (35,529)
Tax adjustment related to prior year (2018 tax 
audit report)  (71)  71  -  - 
 54,580  372,093  (433,491)  (6,818)Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
150Bank 
2021Balance at 
1 January Charge for 
the year Payment Balance at 
31 December 
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Year of assessmentUp to 2020  (34,534)  (34,534)
2021  261,416  (191,164)  70,252 
National Fiscal Stabilization Levy
 8,350  40,490  (34,443)  14,397 
Financial Sector Recovery Levy  -  30,368  (25,832)  4,536 
Tax adjustment related to prior year (2018 tax 
audit report)  (71)  -  -  (71)
 (26,255)  332,274  (251,439)  54,580 
The tax position up to the 2021 year of assessment has been agreed with the tax authorities. Liabilities arising 
have been settled as of 31 December 2022.The tax position for the remaining year of assessment is yet to be agreed with the tax authorities.
20. Deferred taxation (assets) / liabilities
Bank 
2022Balance  
at 1 JanMovement 
during  
the yearBalance at  
31 DecDeferred tax  
assetsDeferred 
tax 
liabilities
Recognised in proﬁt and loss
Property and equipment  7,480  4,248  11,728  -  11,728 
Loans and advances  (173,910)  (522,131)  (696,041)  (696,041)  - 
Employee beneﬁt obligation  (28,366)  (4,033)  (32,399)  (32,399)  - 
Provision  (2,207)  (630)  (2,837)  (2,837)  - 
 (197,003)  (522,546)  (719,549)  (731,277)  11,728 
Recognised in OCIEmployment beneﬁt obligations  (11,948)  2,524  (9,424)  (9,424)  - 
Listed equity investments  436  -  436  -  436 
Adjustment listed equity 
investments  (108)  169  61  61  - 
Fair Value-Unlisted Investment  36  (45)  (9)  -  (9)
 (11,584)  2,648  (8,936)  (9,363)  427 
Recognised in Retained Earnings
Impairment for 2017 (IFRS 9)  (29,340)  -  (29,340)  (29,340)  - 
 -  -  -  -  - 
Total  (237,927)  (519,898)  (757,825)  (769,980)  12,155 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
151Group
2022Balance  
at 1 JanMovement 
during  
the yearBalance at  
31 DecDeferred tax  
assetsDeferred tax  
liabilities
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Recognised in proﬁt and lossProperty and equipment  7,482  3,957  11,439  -  11,439 
Loans and advances  (173,910)  (526,314)  (700,224)  (700,224)  - 
Employee beneﬁt obligation  (28,366)  (4,033)  (32,399)  (32,399)  - 
Provisions  (2,207)  (630)  (2,837)  (2,837)  - 
Tax losses carried forward  44  -  44  -  44 
 (196,957)  (527,020)  (723,977)  (735,460)  11,483 
Recognised in OCIEmployee Beneﬁt obligation  (11,948)  2,524  (9,424)  (9,424)  - 
Listed equity investments  313  (153)  160  160  - 
Adjustment listed equity 
investments (107)  169  62  -  62 
Fair Value - Unlisted Investment  (132)  4,527  4,395  4,395  - 
 (11,874)  7,067  (4,807)  (4,869)  62 
Recognised in Retained Earnings
Impairment for 2017 (IFRS 9)  (29,340)  -  (29,340)  (29,340)  - 
Total  (238,171)  (519,953)  (758,124)  (769,669)  11,545 
Bank 
2021Balance  
at 1 JanMovement 
during  
the yearBalance at  
31 DecDeferred tax  
assetsDeferred 
tax 
liabilities
Recognised in proﬁt and loss
Property and equipment  20,361   (12,881)  7,480  -  7,480 
Loans and advances  (120,150)  (53,760)  (173,910)  (173,910)  - 
Employee beneﬁt obligation  (17,521)  (10,845)  (28,366)  (28,366)  - 
Provisions  (558)  (1,649)  (2,207)  (2,207)  - 
 (117,868)  (79,135)  (197,003)  (204,483)  7,480 
Recognised in OCIEmployment beneﬁt obligations  (10,813)  (1,135)  (11,948)  (11,948)  - 
Listed equity investments  647  (211)  436  -  436 
Adjustment listed equity 
investments  (108)  -  (108)  (108)  - 
Fair Value-Unlisted Investment  27  9  36  -  36 
 (10,247)  (1,337)  (11,584)  (12,056)  472 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
152Bank 
2021Balance  
at 1 JanMovement 
during  
the yearBalance at  
31 DecDeferred tax  
assetsDeferred 
tax 
liabilities
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Recognised in Retained EarningsImpairment for 2017 (IFRS 9)  (29,340)  -  (29,340)  (29,340)  - 
Total  (157,455)  (80,472)  (237,927)  (245,879)  7,952 
Group
2021Balance  
at 1 JanMovement 
during  
the yearBalance at  
31 DecDeferred tax  
assetsDeferred tax  
liabilities
Property and equipment  20,361  (12,879)  7,482  -  7,482 
Loans and advances  (120,150)  (53,760)  (173,910)  (173,910)  - 
Employee beneﬁt obligation  (17,521)  (10,845)  (28,366)  (28,366)  - 
Provisions  (558)  (1,649)  (2,207)  (2,207)  - 
Tax losses carried forward  44  -  44  -  44 
 (117,824)  (79,133)  (196,957)  (204,483)  7,526 
Recognised in OCI
Employment beneﬁt obligations  (10,813)  (1,135)  (11,948)  (11,948)  - 
Listed equity investments  262  51  313  -  313 
Adjustment listed equity 
investments  (107)  -  (107)  (107)  - 
Fair Value-Unlisted investment in subsidiary - 2018 (5,368)  -  (5,368)  (5,368)  - 
Fair Value-Unlisted investment in subsidiary - 2017  12,232  -  12,232  -  12,232 
Fair Value-Unlisted Investment  (7,507)  511  (6,996)  (6,996)  - 
 (11,301)  (573)  (11,874)  (24,419)  12,545 
Recognised in Retained Earnings
Impairment for 2017 (IFRS 9)  (29,340)  -  (29,340)  (29,340)  - 
Total  (158,465)  (79,706)  (238,171)  (258,242)  20,071 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
15321. Earnings per share
Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the net proﬁt attributable to equity holders of the Bank by the 
weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
2022 2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Proﬁt attributable to equity holders  (555,798)  (593,398)  556,667  572,281 
Weighted average number of ordinary shares (basic 
and diluted)  265,000  265,000  265,000  265,000 
Basic earnings per share (expressed in Ghana pesewas per share)  (210)  (224)  210  216 
Diluted earnings per share (expressed in Ghana pesewas per share)  (210)  (224)  210  216 
22. Cash and cash equivalents
2022 2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Cash on hand  619,614  619,614  415,788  415,788 
Balance with Bank of Ghana  3,333,909  3,333,909  1,653,519  1,653,519 
Items in course of collection  105,878  105,878  187,571  187,571 
Accounts with other Banks  417,477  417,477  44,214  44,214 
 4,476,878  4,476,878  2,301,092  2,301,092 
Current  4,476,878  4,476,878  2,301,092  2,301,092 
Non-current  -  -  -  - 
An amount of GHS 2,367,446,461 was maintained with Bank of Ghana (2021:GHS 1,107,093,994) representing 
the mandatory cash reserve as per the weekly Banking Supervision Department (BSD1) returns for the week ending 11 January 2023 (2021: 12 January 2022). This reserve represents and complies with the mandatory minimum of 14% (2021: 10%) of the Bank’s total deposits and is not available for use in the Bank’s day-to-day operations. Cash on hand, items in the course of collection and balances with Bank of Ghana are non-interest-bearing.
23.  Non-pledged trading assets
2022 2021
Bank Group Bank Group
At 1 January  477,658  477,658  221,339  221,339 
Net movement  (200,877)  (200,877)  84,959  84,959 
Gains/losses from changes in fair value  (789)  (789)  171,360  171,360 
At 31 December  275,992  275,992  477,658  477,658 
Current  275,992  275,992  477,658  477,658 
Non-current  -  -  -  - Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
15424. Investments (other than securities)
2022 2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Listed equity instruments (note 24a)  3,872  4,469  3,195  4,902 
Unlisted equity instruments (note 24bi)  405  38,877  584  21,464 
 4,277  43,346  3,779  26,366 
24a.  Listed equity instruments
2022 2021
Bank Group Bank Group
At 1 January  3,196  4,902  1,895  2,994 
Disposal  -  (880)  -  - 
Changes in fair values  676  447  1,300  1,908 
At 31 December  3,872  4,469  3,195  4,902 
This represents investments in the ordinary shares of a number of listed companies.
24bi. Unlisted equity instruments
2022 2021
Bank Group Bank Group
At 1 January  584  21,464  438  15,540 
Additions  -  846  -  7,321 
Changes in fair values  (179)  16,567  146  (1,397)
At 31 December  405  38,877  584  21,464 
24bii. Fair values of unlisted equity instruments
2022 2021
Ordinary 
shares Bank GroupOrdinary 
shares Bank Group
Fidelity Bank 0.05%  405  405 0.05%  584  584 
Vivo Energy Limited 9%  -  5,469 9%  -  3,899 
Oasis Africa Fund 5.94%  -  27,929 4.95%  -  13,022 
Real Estates Investment Trust 9.13%  -  5,074 9.13%  -  3,959 
At 31 December -  405  38,877 -  584  21,464 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
15525i. Loans and advances to customers
2022 2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Term loans  6,133,970  6,133,970 4,696,829 4,696,829
Overdrafts  371,907  371,907 211,667 211,667
Sta/uniFB00 loans  210,554  210,554 295,219 295,219
Gross loans and advances 6,716,431 6,716,431 5,203,715 5,203,715
Less
Interest in suspense  (150,086)  (150,086)  (87,256)  (87,256)
Allowance for impairment  (1,084,130)  (1,084,130)  (810,079)  (810,079)
Net loans and advances 5,482,215 5,482,215 4,306,380 4,306,380
Current  4,788,782  4,788,782 3,456,245 3,456,245
Non-current  693,433  693,433 850,135 850,135
Allowance for impairmentBalance at 1 January 810,079 810,708 597,965 598,594
Charge for the year 274,051 274,051 324,800 324,800
Write o/uniFB00s  -     -     (112,686)  (112,686)
Balance at 31 December 1,084,130 1,084,759 810,079 810,708
The ﬁfty largest exposures represent 52% of the loans and advances at the end of the year (2021: 45%). For 
detailed analysis of list per stage, refer to Credit Risk disclosures.
25 ii. Advances to banks
2022 2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Placement with other banks 232,041 232,041 203,956 203,956
Impairment (2,926) (2,926) (2,926) (2,926)
Balance at 31 December 229,115 229,115 201,030 201,030
Current  229,115  229,115 201,030 201,030
All placement with other banks are short-term and mature less than 3 months after year-end.
Allowance for impairment
2022 2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Balance at 1 January 2,926 2,926 2,926 2,926
Charge for the year  -     -     -     -    
Balance at 31 December 2,926 2,926 2,926 2,926
For detailed analysis of list per stage, refer to Credit Risk disclosures (Note 6). Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
15626.  Investment securities
2022 2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Short - term investments
Stocks and bonds  3,497,830  3,497,830 3,981,539 4,038,078 
Treasury bills  2,096,954  2,118,191 600,969 602,849 
5,594,784 5,616,021 4,582,508 4,640,927 
Medium - term investmentsGOG bonds  -     -    58,993 58,993 
Long - term investmentsGOG note 5 years ﬁxed rate  4,830,251  4,888,788 5,065,920 5,065,920 
Impairment of investment  (1,814,474)  (1,831,208)  -     -    
Balance at 31 December 8,610,561 8,673,601 9,707,421 9,765,840 
At 1 January 9,707,421 9,765,840 8,575,901 8,622,846 
Additions  11,164,174  11,186,629 13,837,968 13,845,854 
Disposals (10,446,560) (10,447,660) (12,706,448) (12,702,860)
Impairment of investment  (1,814,474)  (1,831,208)  -     -    
8,610,561 8,673,601 9,707,421 9,765,840 
Current  2,096,954  2,118,191  937,818  939,697 
Non-current  6,513,607  6,555,410 8,769,603 8,826,143 
Allowance for investment securities
2022 2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Balance at 1 January  -     -     -     -    
Charge for the year  (1,814,474)  (1,831,208)  -     -    
Balance at 31 December  (1,814,474)  (1,831,208)  -     -    
27. Investments in subsidiaries
GCB Bank PLC has two subsidiaries; GCB Capital Limited and G-Money Mobile Services Limited. GCB Capital 
Limited is engaged in investment banking activities while G-Money Mobile Services is into Mobile Money Services.
The Bank’s holding in this entity is as set out below:
Bank
Name of company 2022
% holding2021
% holding2022
Carrying 
amount2021 
Carrying 
amount
GCB Capital Limited 100 100 2,000 1,000
G-Money Financial Services Limited 100  - 1,000  - 
3,000Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
157Group
Name of company 2022
% holding2021
% holding2022
Carrying 
amount2021 
Carrying 
amount
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Shelter and Habitat 100  - 100  - 
100
28. Investment in associates
2022 2021
Bank Group Bank Group
At 1 January 28,274 82,280 28,274 91,681
Additions  -     -     -     15,709 
Share of proﬁt, net of tax  -     (11,915)  -    (6,972)
Share of OCI  -     (6,437)  -     (4,314)
Dividends received from associates  -     (4,193)  -    (3508)
Impairment of associates  -     -     -    (1571)
Exchange di/uniFB00erences on translating foreign 
operation -     32,888  -     (8,836)
Interest received from associate  -     (9)  -     (4)
Interest paid to associate  -     64  -    95
Total at 31 December 28,274 92,678 28,274 82,280
The Bank has one direct associate Ghana International Bank (GHIB) and it considers Ghana International Bank 
(GHIB) as material to the Group. The Bank in addition holds indirect interest of 25% and 34% in Accra Markets Limited and NCR Ghana Limited respectively through its subsidiary, GCB Capital. This is accounted for using the equity method.
The country of incorporation is the same as the principal place of business for all associates. The percentage 
voting rights is equal to the percentage ownership for all associates.
Ghana International Bank is a strategic investment that facilitates the Group’s international trade.
Summarised ﬁnancial information of material associates
Summarised Statement of Proﬁt or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income                       
2022 2021
Revenue  246,714 101,856
Proﬁt/(Loss) from continuing operations  (93,105) (72,311)
Other comprehensive income/(loss)  (32,186) (21,570)
Total comprehensive income  (125,291) (93,881)
Attributable to investee’s shareholders  (125,291) (93,881)Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
158Summarised Statement of Financial Position         
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2022 2021
Assets
Current  8,914,930 5,798,360
Non-current  364,146 432,176
Total assets  9,279,076 6,230,536
LiabilitiesCurrent  7,477,677 5,170,506
Non-current  173,692 84,235
Total liabilities  7,651,369 5,254,741
Net assets  1,627,707 975,795
Attributable to investee's shareholders  1,627,707 975,795
Group's interest in net assets  325,541 195,159
Carrying amount  92,678  82,280 
29. Property, equipment and right-of-use assets
 
BankLeasehold 
land & 
buildingsFurniture &  
equipmentMotor 
Vehicles ComputersRight of 
use 
assetsCapital 
work in 
progress Total
Cost
Balance as at 
1 January 2022192,533 248,567 25,029 208,108 38,704 42,927 755,868 
Addition  4,164  11,858  9,319  46,063  87,596  40,916  199,916 
Disposals  -     (53)  (2,025)  (4)  -     -     (2,082)
Transfer to G -Money -     (154)  -     (5,722)
 -     -     (5,876)
Transfers  22,975  12,650  2,009  843  -     (38,477)  -    
Balance at 31 December 2022 219,672 272,868 34,332 249,288 126,300 45,366 947,826 
Accumulated depreciation
1 Jan 2022 32,976 213,624 14,818 164,558 29,434  -    455,410 
Charge for the year  6,409  18,979  4,617  28,714  12,761  -     71,480 
Disposal  -     (53)  (1,982)  (4)  -     -     (2,039)
Transfer to G 
-Money  -     (78)  -     (5,497)  -     -     (5,575)
Balance at 31 December 2022 39,385 232,472 17,453 187,771 42,195  -    519,276 
Net book value
Balance as at 
31 December 2022 180,287 40,396 16,879 61,517 84,105 45,366 428,550 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
159BankLeasehold 
land 
& buildingsFurniture &  
equipmentMotor 
Vehicles ComputersRight of 
use 
assetsCapital 
work in 
progress Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
CostBalance as at 
1 January 2021 177,280 231,029 20,334 184,026 34,509 23,589 670,767 
Addition 842 13,769 7,436 7,306 4,195 55,187 88,735 
Disposals  -    (140) (3,478)  (16)  -     -    (3,634)
Transfers 14,411 3,909 737 16,792  -    (35,849)  -    
Balance at 31 December 2021 192,533 248,567 25,029 208,108 38,704 42,927 755,868 
Accumulated depreciation
1 Jan 2021 27,222 192,405 14,699 138,480 17,948  -    390,754 
Charge for the year 5,754 21,354 3,278 26,094 11,486  -    67,966 
Disposal  -    (135) (3,159)  (16)  -     -    (3,310)
Balance at 
31 December 2021 32,976 213,624 14,818 164,558 29,434  -    455,410 
Net book value
Balance as at 
31 December 2021 159,557 34,943 10,211 43,550 9,270 42,927 300,458 
 
GroupLeasehold 
land & 
buildingsFurniture &  
equipmentMotor 
Vehicles ComputersRight of 
use 
assetsCapital 
work in 
progress Total
Cost
Balance as at 
1 January 2022 192,996 248,906 25,524 208,339 38,704 42,927 757,396 
Addition  4,171  11,874  9,669  46,103  87,596  40,916  200,329 
Disposals  -     (53)  (2,027)  (4)  -     -     (2,084)
Transfers  22,975  12,650  2,009  843  -     (38,477)  -    
Balance at 31 December 2022 220,142 273,377 35,175 255,281 126,300 45,366 955,641 
Accumulated depreciation
1 Jan 2022 32,990 213,808 15,132 164,700 29,433  -    456,063 
Charge for the year  6,418  19,088  4,764  28,932  12,761  -     71,963 
Disposal  -     (53)  (1,982)  (4)  -     -     (2,039)
Balance at 
31 December 2022 39,408 232,843 17,914 193,628 42,194  -    525,987 
Net book value
Balance as at 
31 December 2022 180,734 40,534 17,261 61,653 84,106 45,366 429,654 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
160GroupLeasehold 
land 
& buildingsFurniture &  
equipmentMotor 
Vehicles ComputersRight of 
use 
assetsCapital 
work in 
progress Total
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
CostBalance as at 
1 January 2021 177,495 231,218 20,829 184,161 34,509 23,589 671,801 
Addition 1,090 13,919 7,436 7,402 4,195 55,187 89,229 
Disposals  -    (140) (3,478)  (16)  -     -    (3,634)
Transfers 14,411 3,909 737 16,792  -    (35,849)  -    
Balance at 31 December 2021 192,996 248,906 25,524 208,339 38,704 42,927 757,396 
Accumulated depreciation
1 Jan 2021 27,227 192,525 14,890 138,558 17,947  -    391,147 
Charge for the year 5,763 21,418 3,402 26,158 11,486  -    68,227 
Disposal  -    (135) (3,159)  (16)  -     -    (3,310)
Balance at 
31 December 2021 32,990 213,808 15,133 164,700 29,433  -    456,064 
Net book value
Balance as at 
31 December 2021 160,006 35,098 10,391 43,639 9,271 42,927 301,332 
There was no indication of impairment of property and equipment held by the Group and the Bank at 
31 December 2022 (2021:Nil). None of the property and equipment of the Group had been pledged as security for liabilities and there were no restrictions on the title of any of the Group’s property and equipment at the reporting date and at the end of the previous year. 
30. Intangible assets 
BankCWIP SoftwareCustomer 
relationship Total
Cost
Balance at 1 January 2022  25,607  343,347  95,306  464,260 
Transfer to G -Money  -  (25,714)  -  (25,714)
Additions  31,670  5,367  -  37,037 
Transfers  (22,159)  22,159  -  - 
Balance at 31 December 2022  35,118  345,159  95,306  475,583 
Accumulated amortisation
Balance at 1 January 2022  -  220,015  76,245  296,260 
Transfer to G -Money  -  (9,299)  -  (9,299)
Charge for the year  -  54,533  19,061  73,594 
Balance at 31 December 2022  -  265,249  95,306  360,555 
Carrying amountsBalance at 31 December 2022  35,118  79,910  -  115,028 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
161BankCWIP SoftwareCustomer 
relationship Total
 Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
 Cost
Balance at 1 January 2021  43,837  267,834  95,306  406,977 
Additions  57,281  -  -  57,281 
Transfers  (75,512)  75,512  -  - 
Balance at 31 December 2021  25,606  343,346  95,306  464,258 
Accumulated amortisation
Balance at 1 January 2021  -  158,873  57,183  216,056 
Charge for the year  -  61,142  19,061  80,203 
Balance at 31 December 2021  -  220,015  76,244  296,259 
Carrying amountsBalance at 31 December 2021  25,606  123,331  19,062  167,999 
                                                                                            
GroupCWIP SoftwareCustomer 
relationship Total
Cost
Balance at 1 January 2022  25,769  343,449  95,306  464,524 
Additions  32,247  5,531  -  37,778 
Transfers  (22,159)  22,159  -  - 
Balance at 31 December 2022  35,857  371,139  95,306  502,302 
Accumulated amortisationBalance at 1 January 2022  -  220,053  76,245  296,298 
Charge for the year  -  63,191  19,061  82,252 
Balance at 31 December 2022  -  283,244  95,306  378,550 
Carrying amountsBalance at 31 December 2022  35,857  87,895  -  123,752 
GroupCWIP SoftwareCustomer 
relationship Total
Cost
Balance at 1 January 2021  43,955  267,936  95,306  407,197 
Additions  57,327  -  -  57,327 
Transfers  (75,513)  75,513  -  - 
Balance at 31 December 2021  25,769  343,449  95,306  464,524 
Accumulated amortisationBalance at 1 January 2021  -  158,878  57,183  216,061 
Charge for the year  -  61,176  19,061  80,237 
Balance at 31 December 2021  -  220,054  76,244  296,298 
Carrying amountsBalance at 31 December 2021  25,769  123,395  19,062  168,226 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
162Intangible assets represent licenses for computer software and customer relationship. There was no indication 
of impairment of    intangible assets held by the Group and the Bank at the reporting date and at the end of the previous year.
31. Other Assets
2022 2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Account receivables 815,809 780,180 418,404 427,677
Prepayments 122,779 122,803 108,859 108,875
938,588 902,983 527,263 536,552
Account receivables for 2022 include GHS 406 million mobile money e-value wallet held by the bank not liquidated at year end.
32 (i) Deposits from banks & other ﬁnancial institutions
2022 2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Current account 95,039 95,039 596,261 596,261
Time deposits 164,108 164,108 151,328 151,328
259,147 259,147 747,589 747,589
Current 259,147 259,147 747,589 747,589
32 (ii) Deposits from customers 
2022 2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Current account 8,210,499 8,194,163 5,725,298 5,714,159
Savings deposits 6,605,673 6,605,673 5,018,638 5,018,638
Time deposits 2,716,075 2,716,075 2,421,730 2,421,730
17,532,247 17,515,911 13,165,666 13,154,527
Current  17,532,247  17,515,911 13,165,666 13,154,527
The twenty largest depositors made up 21.01% of total deposits at the end of the year (2021:17.30%).
33. Other liabilities
2022 2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Creditors 254,236 254,236 322,992 322,992
Accruals 73,740 74,768 86,643 89,939
Others 258,501 258,720 234,242 233,625
586,477 587,724 643,877 646,556
Current 586,477 587,724 643,877 646,556Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
16333a. Provisions
Provisions are made for liabilities that the Bank believe will be payable as a result of past events. The ﬁgures for 
the various provisions are the best estimates they believe will be paid to settle the liabilities.
Legal: Provision for legal cases is the best estimates of claims from legal cases that the bank believes it is 
probable that judgement may go against the bank based on assessment by the bank’s legal team.
Annual General Meeting: The bank holds AGM every year in line with the requirement of the Companies Act. 
The provisions made for the year is management best estimate of the cost of holding 2022 AGM.
Other Provisions: This includes provision for Audit fees, Provision for 70th anniversary and sta/uniFB00 related provisions 
such as sta/uniFB00 awards and sta/uniFB00 welfare provisions. The amount for each provision is the best estimate management believe will be required to settle the liability.
Movement on Provisions during the year
 Legal  AGM  Others  Total Provision 
 Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Balance as at January 1, 2022  8,827  810  95,008  104,645 
Add Charged for the year  6,466  948  170,866  178,280 
Payments/Releases in 2022  (3,945)  (893)  (128,256)  (133,094)
Balance at December 31, 2022  11,348   865   137,618  149,831 
34. Borrowings
The Group and Bank 2022 2021
At 1 January 988,073 772,525 
Additions 30,591,745 25,402,045 
Repayments (30,576,650) (25,186,497)
1,003,168 988,073 
Comprising:
Bank of Ghana  199,384 599,384 
First National Bank (FNB)  -    13,860 
First Atlantic Bank  100,000  -    
KAE Ghana Limited  6,406  -    
Fidelity Bank  -    30,000 
CAL Asset Management Ltd  17,900  -    
Ghana Amalgamated Trust Plc  20,000 42,500 
Teachers Fund  -    25,000 
National Investment Bank  100,000  -    
Service Intergrity Savings & Loans  25,000  -    
United Bank for Africa  -    46,201 
Energy Commission  22,227 20,000 
Sahel Sahara Bank  -    35,000 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
164The Group and Bank 2022 2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Societe Generale Bank  -    50,000 
Ghana International Bank  -    126,128 
Development Bank Ghana  400,000 -
Ghana Hostels Limited  3,000 -
Allianz Insurance  3,000 -
Akwapim Rural Bank Ltd  2,082 -
ICBC Standard Bank Plc  66,461 -
Others  37,708 -
1,003,168 988,073 
35. Employment beneﬁt obligations
The Group and Bank 2022 2021
Post-employment deﬁned beneﬁt plan (a)  127,206 110,779 
Other long-term employee beneﬁt (b)  2,390 2,685 
129,596 113,464 
Post employment deﬁned and other long term beneﬁt plan 
Apart from the legally required social security scheme, the Bank contributes to the following post employment 
deﬁned beneﬁt plans and other long term employee beneﬁt plan. These plans expose the Bank to actuarial risks, such as longevity risk, interest rate risk and market risk (investment risk).
Other long term employee beneﬁt plan
Plan A    long service awards accrue to employees based on graduated periods of uninterrupted service. These 
awards accrue over the service life of employees. Employees in service with the Bank after ﬁfteen (15) years become eligible to receive cash payments at graduated rates when employees achieve stipulated milestones set by the Bank. The terms of settlement of long service award is based on the achievement of every milestone. 
Post employment deﬁned beneﬁt plan
Plan B    The Bank pays monthly pension beneﬁts to retired employees, under a closed deﬁned beneﬁt pension 
scheme. Under this scheme, beneﬁciaries are paid pensions equal to 60% of the net basic salaries of their serving counterparts.
Plan C    The Bank also pays post retirement medical care for its retired sta/uniFB00 and their dependents below 18 
years of age.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
165Movements for the year
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2022 2021
At 1 January 110,779 110,599 
Net expense recognised in proﬁt or loss  22,642 21,401 
Other comprehensive income  10,097 (4,540)
Other  (16,312) (16,681)
127,206 110,779 
Net expense recognised in proﬁt or loss
Current service cost  756 686 
Interest expense / (income)  21,886 20,715 
22,642 21,401 
Included in other comprehensive incomeRe-measurement of loss/(gain)Actuarial loss/(gain) arising from:Financial assumptions  1,020 (11,067)
Experience  9,077 6,527 
10,097 (4,540)
OtherBeneﬁts paid (16,312) (16,681)
Net movement 16,427 180 
Balance at 31 December represented by:Net deﬁned beneﬁt liability (Plan B)  64,607 65,820 
Net deﬁned beneﬁt liability (Plan C)  62,599 44,959 
127,206 110,779 Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
166Other long-term employee beneﬁts
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2022 2021
Movement for the year
At 1 January 2,685 2,723 
Net expense recognised in proﬁt or loss  652 596 
Actuarial gains/loss recognised in proﬁt or loss  737 988 
Other  (1,684) (1,622)
At 31 December 2,390 2,685 
Movement for the yearNet expense recognised in proﬁt or lossCurrent service cost  216 178 
Interest expense/(income)  436 418 
652 596 
Included in proﬁt or lossRe-measurement of loss/(gain)Actuarial loss/(gain) arising from:Financial assumptions  (294) (27)
Experience  1,031 1,015 
737 988 
OtherBeneﬁts paid (1,684) (1,622)
The following are the principal actuarial assumptions at the reporting date:
2022 2021
Discount rates used 21.38% 20.51%
Future salary growth 15.00% 12.50%
Rate of inﬂation 10.00% 11.00%
Medical inﬂation 13.00% 13.00%
Future pension growth 13.50% 12.50%
Sensitivity analysis (Combined schemes)
Reasonably possible changes at the reporting date to any of the relevant actuarial assumptions, holding other 
assumptions constant, would have a/uniFB00ected the deﬁned beneﬁt obligation by the following amounts shown below:
2022 2021
Increase Decrease Increase Decrease
Discount rate (2% movement) (12,579) 16,105 (11,520) 14,578 
Future pension growth (2% movement) 5,433 (4,803) 6,030 (5,307)
Medical inﬂation (2% movement) 12,835 (9,616) 10,413 (7,609)Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
167Although the analysis does not take account of the full distribution of cash ﬂows expected under the plans, it 
does provide an approximation of the sensitivity of the assumptions shown.
36. Capital and reserves
i. Stated Capital
2022 2021
Authorised:Number 
(000)Value Number 
(000)Value
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Ordinary shares of no par value 1,500,000 - 1,500,000 -
Issued:Issued for cash 115,000 60,030 115,000 60,030
Transfer from Retained Earnings 86,500 438,343 86,500 438,343
Capitalisation of reserves 1,000 2 1,000 2
Transfer from other surplus 62,500 1,625 62,500 1,625
265,000 500,000 265,000 500,000
There is no unpaid liability and no call or instalment unpaid on any share. There is no share in treasury. There 
was no movement on stated capital during the year.
ii. Statutory reserve fund
Statutory reserve represents cumulative amounts set aside from annual proﬁts after tax required under the Banking Act. The proportion of net proﬁts transferred to reserves ranges from 12.5% to 50% of net proﬁt after tax, depending on the relationship that the balance on statutory reserves bears to paid-up capital.
iii. Regulatory Credit risk reserve
Credit risk reserve represents the cumulative balance of amounts transferred from retained earnings to meet gaps in impairment allowances based on Bank of Ghana’s provision guidelines and IFRS.
2022 2021
Credit risk reserves - Loans and advances Bank Group Bank Group
IFRS impairment  2,901,531  2,918,265 813,005 813,005
Bank of Ghana provision  1,170,687  1,170,687  764,736  764,736 
Excess of BoG provision over IFRS impairment - - - -
Total credit risk reserve - - - -
iv. Fair value reserves
The fair value reserve comprises the cumulative net change in the fair value of equity instruments until the assets are derecognised or impaired.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
168v. Other reserves
Other reserves represent actuarial gains and losses on pension obligations and foreign currency di/uniFB00erences 
arising from the translation of the ﬁnancial statements of foreign operations. 
2022 2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
At 1 January (26,754) (3,916) (32,429) (755)
Actuarial (loss)/ gain  (10,097)  (10,097) 4,540 4,540
Deferred tax on actuarial loss  (2,524)  (2,524) 1,135 1,135 
Foreign currency translation di/uniFB00erences on 
foreign operations  -     32,887  -    (8,836)
At 31 December (39,374) 16,350 (26,754) (3,916)
37. Contingent liabilities and commitments
O/uniFB00 balance sheet items
The Group engages in business activities involving acceptances, performance bonds and indemnities. The 
majority of these facilities are o/uniFB00set by corresponding obligations of third parties, the nominal amounts of which are not reﬂected in the statements of ﬁnancial position.
Nature of instruments
An acceptance is an undertaking by a Bank to pay a bill of exchange drawn on a customer. The Bank expects most acceptances to be presented, but reimbursement by the customer is normally immediate.
Other contingent liabilities include transaction related customs and performance bonds and are generally short 
term commitments to third parties.
Commitments to lend to a customer in the future are made subject to certain conditions. Such commitments 
are either made for a ﬁxed period or agreed maturity dates but are cancellable by the lender subject to notice requirements. Documentary credits commit the Bank to make payments to third parties on the production of documents, which are usually reimbursed immediately by customers. Customers are required to deposit cash in a margin account in respect of documentary and commercial letters of credit.
The following summarize the nominal principal amounts of contingent liabilities and commitments with o/uniFB00  
balance sheet risks.
2022 2021
Bank Group Bank Group
Guarantees and indemnities  882,917  882,917 916,478 916,478
Documentary and commercial letters of credit  737,070  737,070 527,205 527,205
 1,619,987  1,619,987 1,443,683 1,443,683
Commitments
Loan commitments  642,920  642,920 645,425 645,425
 2,262,907  2,262,907 2,089,108 2,089,108Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
169Legal proceedings
The Bank is defending a number of legal actions brought against it as at 31 December 2022. Legal proceedings 
as at the end of the reporting period, instituted against the Group/Bank are described below. These cases have been brought against the Bank by either former employees, customers or other persons. No provision has been made in this ﬁnancial statement as the Group’s Management does not consider that there is any probable loss.
Plainti/uniFB00 vrs GCB Bank PLC & Others 
The Plainti/uniFB00, had an ongoing litigation against UT Bank in the High Court relating to ownership of 10,000 metric tons of crude oil on board the vessel Olympic Faith. The High Court during the pendency of the suit ordered the crude to be sold and US$7,000,000.00 of the proceeds of the sale lodged with UT Bank in the name of the Registrar and invested at a rate of 2%.  Prior to the court granting judgment in this case, the Bank of Ghana revoked the banking licence of UT Bank and appointed Receivers to handle the a/uniFB00airs of UT Bank. 
The High Court gave judgment against UT Bank and directed GCB Bank to pay an amount of US$7.43m. The 
Receivers ﬁled an Application in the Supreme Court in the name of UT Bank (in Receivership) and quashed the ruling of the High Court, which had ordered GCB Bank to pay the said amount to the Registrar.
The High Court on February 7, 2020 delivered its ruling after the examination of the judgment debtors and 
ordered that GCB pays the Plainti/uniFB00 the said US$7.43m. The Bank ﬁled an Appeal in the Court of Appeal seeking for a reversal of the ruling given by the High Court requesting the Bank to pay the US$ 7.43m to the Registrar of the Court following the assumption of UT Bank.
Management believes that its appeal in the Court of Appeal will be successful as there is evidence on the 
records of the High Court by the Joint Receivers that the claim by the Plainti/uniFB00 should be directed to the Joint Receivers for settlement and not GCB. Furthermore, the Supreme Court in its previous decision of July 17th 2018 quashed an earlier ruling of the High Court and clearly stated that the order of the High Court dated 2/2/2018 to GCB to pay the said amount was against the provisions of section 128 (c) of Act 930. The Appeal is slated for March 30, 2023 There is no need to provide for it.  
Plainti/uniFB00 vrs GCB Bank PLC & Others 
This case involved a vessel and its owners, who had instituted legal action against the then UT Bank, UT Financial Services Limited and Morgan Energy Limited under charter party agreement for wrongful arrest of their vessel, with potential liabilities of US$1.64 million. The High Court in Nigeria on 4th July 2016 dismissed the case against UT Bank and two other persons, but the vessel and its owners dissatisﬁed with the High Court’s judgment appealed to the Court of Appeal. The appeal was pending against ex-UT Bank before the Purchase & Assumption arrangement was entered into. Following the withdrawal of UT Bank’s licence in August 2017, the Appellant obtained an order to substitute GCB for UT Bank. GCB resisted this motion but the Court of Appeal of Nigeria substituted both GCB and the Joint Receivers in place of UT Bank. GCB has appealed against this interlocutory ruling substituting it to the Supreme Court of Nigeria. The case is currently pending before the Supreme Court of Nigeria. No date has been ﬁxed for the hearing of the appeal against the substitution yet.  
Meanwhile the appeal by the appellant (the Vessel MT Sylla) against the decision of the High Court dismissing 
the case of wrongful arrest was dismissed by Court of Appeal in Nigeria on 22 April, 2022. The Plainti/uniFB00 further appealed to the Supreme Court in Nigeria but later ﬁled a notice of discontinuance which is yet to be heard,
Based on legal advice, the amount has not been provided for on the grounds that the Bank is indemniﬁed of all 
liabilities that may arise outside the purchase and assumption agreement. Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
170Plainti/uniFB00 vrs GCB Bank PLC & Others 
An originating summons has been ﬁled in the Federal High Court of Nigeria  by the Plainti/uniFB00s claiming  jointly 
and severally against the UT Bank Ghana Limited, GCB Bank PLC , and UT Financial Services Limited (hereinafter referred to as “Respondents” ) for an order that the undertaking given by UT Bank on the 9th of November 2010 to pay damages for the release of  vessel which had been arrested, the respondents are liable jointly and severally for the payments of damages amounting to US$1,082,000.00 and legal costs of US$250,000.00. 
At the time the said undertaking was given GCB Bank PLC was not part of the respondents. However, the 
plainti/uniFB00s are seeking to enforce the undertaking against GCB on the principle that GCB Bank PLC is the successor company of UT Bank Ghana Limited (under receivership) and therefore vicariously liable for the actions of UT Bank Limited. 
Based on legal advice, the bank cannot be held liable for the undertaking given by UT Bank. 
Plainti/uniFB00 vrs GCB Bank PLC & Others 
The plainti/uniFB00 claims against the Bank for rent arrears from July 2018 till date at US$ 11,698 per month, that the 
alleging that the Bank vacated the property of the plainti/uniFB00 in Kumasi. The plainti/uniFB00 further claims for arrears of service charges at GHS 1,615 per month from March 2016 as well as US$ 10,000 for property damage plus interest on all the amounts being claimed. 
The Bank is of the opinion that the Plainti/uniFB00 had already lodged a proof of debt with the Joint Receivers which is 
the right thing to do as the Bank never stepped into the shoes of the ex-Capital bank as a tenant to the said property. 
Plainti/uniFB00 vrs GCB Bank PLC & Others 
The Plainti/uniFB00 claims for the reliefs below being severe loss su/uniFB00ered and damages to its operations allegedly caused by the actions of the Bank:
A declaration that the 1st and 2nd Defendants knew that the destroyed machines were not the subject matter 
of the facility which was ﬁnally auctioned in satisfaction of the judgment debt; Recovery of the sum of sixty-three million, eight hundred and ﬁfty two thousand United States Dollars (US$ 63,852,000) being the total sum of unlawful destruction and or appropriation of Plainti/uniFB00s machines, chemicals and o/uniFB03ce equipment; Interest on the said sum at the prevailing Commercial Bank rate from February 2012 to the date of ﬁnal payment; Damages for trespass against the Defendants; and Costs including legal fees and any other relief(s) that the Court deem ﬁt.
The estimated liability to the Bank is as stated in the claim, which shall not exceed US$ 64,000,000. The Bank 
is conﬁdent in its defence as the ﬁgures the Plainti/uniFB00 is claiming have to be proved with documentary evidence. 
Plainti/uniFB00 vrs GCB Bank PLC & Others 
Plainti/uniFB00’s claim is for general damages of GHS70 million for its breach of duty of care and general damages of GHS30 million for defamation for dishonoured cheques and cost including legal fees. The Bank has ﬁled conditional appearance and statement of defence. The Bank has also ﬁled a motion to strike out the suit against it because the Bank is not the proper party to the suit.
Management is conﬁdent of winning this case as the issues set out for trial is a matter between Gen X and the 
4th Defendant for which the court has already directed that the two parties try amicable settlement of same.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
17138. Related parties
a. Transactions with executive directors and key management personnel
Key management personnel are deﬁned as those persons having authority and responsibility for planning, 
directing and controlling the activities of the Group (directly or indirectly) and comprise the Directors and Senior Management of GCB Bank PLC.
Remuneration of Executive Directors and other key management personnel
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis 2022 2021
Salaries and other short-term beneﬁts  29,463 20,150 
Post-employment beneﬁts  3,531 2,507 
32,994 22,657 
Remuneration of the Executive Directors during the year amounted to GHS 13.78m. (2021: GHS 7.62m).
Details of transactions and balances between the Bank and Executive Directors and other key management 
personnel are as follows:
Loans 2022 2021
Loans outstanding at 1 January 4,130 2,463 
Net movement  (282) 1,667 
Loans outstanding at 31 December 3,848 4,130 
Interest income 207 172 
Deposits
Deposits at 1 January 1,215 1,048 
Net movement during the year  3,781 167 
Deposits at 31 December 4,996 1,215 
Interest expense 263 130 
Loans to executive directors and key management personnel which include housing, car and other personal 
loans are given under terms that are not more favourable than those given to other sta/uniFB00. No impairment has been recognised in respect of loans granted to executive directors and key management personnel at 31 December 2022. The housing and car loans are secured by the underlying assets. All other loans are unsecured. No individual director has a loan amount more than 1% of the stated capital. The total loan amount of the directors is also less than 1% of the stated capital. No individual sta/uniFB00 member has a loan amount more than 2% of the stated capital. 
b. Transactions with non executive directors
No loan was advanced to non executive director during the year. There were no balances outstanding on account of loans due from non executive directors at the year end.
Fees and allowances paid to non executive directors during the year amounted to GHS 3.54m (2021: GHS 
2.54m).Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
172c. Transactions and balances with subsidiaries
GCB Capital Limited 
Fixed deposit investments are placed with the Bank. The subsidiaries’ current account is held with the Bank. 
Interest accrues on these placements at normal commercial rates. Balances due to/from the subsidiaries at the year-end were as follows:
Other Assets 2022 2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis
Amounts due from subsidiary in respect of unpaid expenses - -
DepositsCurrent account 16,337 11,139 
The Bank entered into the following transactions with its subsidiary:
2022 2021
Management fees - -
d. Balances and transactions with associates
Balances due to/from associates at year-end were as follows:
2022 2021
Current account balances (Foreign) - GHIB  (606,203) 31,112 
Credit Facilities (Foreign) - GHIB  -    116,775 
Contingent letter of credit and acceptances (Foreign) - GHIB  1,080  8,663 
The Group entered into the following transactions with its associates:Dividend received  -     -    
Interest received on current account balances (foreign)  45  21 
Interest paid on current account balances (foreign)  (318)  (468)
Government of Ghana
The Government of Ghana directly holds 21.36% shares in GCB Bank PLC and 29.89% indirectly through its 
shareholding in SSNIT. The total of its direct and indirect shareholding is 51.25%.
39.  Going concern
The directors have, at the time of approving the ﬁnancial statements, a reasonable expectation that the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future. Thus, they continue to adopt the going concern basis.Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
17340.  Subsequent events
In February 2023, the Group signed on to the Ghana Domestic Debt Exchange program and exchanged its 
eligible bonds for new bonds issued by the Republic of Ghana. Due to the announcement on 5 December 2022 and the level of investments held, there has been a signiﬁcant impact on the carrying amount of investments held with the Government of Ghana.
In 2023, the Group will derecognise the old bonds and recognise the fair value of the new bonds. The di/uniFB00erence 
between the carrying amount of the old bond and the fair value amount of the new bonds shall be recognized in the income statement. See note 15b for disclosure on the DDE program. 
41.  Corporate social responsibility
As the Bank with rich Ghanaian heritage, we have consistently been committed to our social responsibilities towards the country and communities we operate in. 
Our CSR policy aimed at ensuring that we develop impactful and measurable CSR projects annually. In line with the policy objectives, a number of CSR projects and interventions were implemented in the year 
under review.
A sum of GHc3,638,877.6 was invested in education, environment, youth development, culture and tradition, 
health, sports, ﬁnancial inclusion, poverty alleviation, among others. 
Notable among our CSR initiatives for the year include:
• The construction of o/uniFB03ce units for the Ghana Prisons Service 
• Construction of Junior High School block for Nalerigu in the East Mamprusi District of the North East Region
• Donation to the Bagre Dam Spillage Relief Fund for victims of the dam spillage. 
• Donation to the Appiatse Community Relief Fund for the reconstruction of the community a/uniFB00ected by the 
Appiatse explosion.
• Donation to the Keta ﬂood relief fund in collaboration with Ghana Association of Bankers (GAB).
• Donation to the Korle-Bu Children’s Cancer Unit
• The purchase of ﬁve incubators through partnership with an NGO for distribution to needy health facilities to help reduce infant mortality rate in the country.
Over the course of our 70 years in existence, GCB’s commitment to our communities has remained a key part of our mandate. As Ghana’s largest indigenous Bank, GCB’s commitment to society is unparallel and we will continue to make substantial investments in CSR in the face of the current economic challenges. Notes to the Financial Statements (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
174Value added statements for the year ended 31 December 2022
2022 2021
Figures in thousands of Ghana Cedis Bank Group Bank Group
Interest earned and other operating income  3,740,256  3,774,987 2,917,406 2,947,188 
Direct cost of Services  (1,435,707)  (1,471,397) (1,006,890) (1,009,001)
Value added by banking services 2,304,549 2,303,590 1,910,516 1,938,187 
Non-banking income  19,792  25,933 9,576 8,610 
Impairments  (2,088,525)  (2,105,259) (324,800) (324,800)
Value added 235,816 224,264 1,595,292 1,621,997 
Distributed as follows:
To Employees:Non-Executive Directors  3,544  3,802 2,539 2,664 
Executives directors  13,789  14,965 9,450 9,952 
Other employees  779,660  782,826 625,327 628,939 
796,993 801,593 637,316 641,555 
To Government:Income tax  (150,453)  (150,061) 253,138 259,694 
To providers of capitalDividend to shareholders  132,500  132,500 66,250 66,250 
To expansion and growth:Depreciation and amortisation  145,074  154,215 148,171 148,466 
Retained Earnings (688,298) (713,983) 490,417 506,032 
Total Distribution 235,816 224,264 1,595,292 1,621,997 Value Added StatementGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
175Analysis of shareholding as at the year-end 2022
No. of 
Shareholders Holders % No. of Shares% of 
Holding
1 - 1,000  84,996  92  18,388,787 7 
1001 - 5,000  6,017  7  13,184,765 5 
5001 - 10,000  539  1  3,978,783 2 
Above 10,000  402  0  229,447,665 87 
91,954 100 265,000,000 100 
Directors’ Shareholdings
The Director named below held the following number of shares in the Bank as at 31 December 2022:
No. of shares % of Holding
Samuel Kwame Yedu-Aidoo 580 0.0002
a. Analysis of shareholding as at the year-end 2022
No. Names No. of shares % of Holding
1. Social Security And National Insurance Trust  79,199,550  29.9 
2. Government Of Ghana C/O Ministry Of Finance  56,608,613  21.3 
3. Ofori, Daniel  19,867,154  7.4 
4. Scgn/Jpmse Lux Re Skagen Kon-Tiki Verdipapirfond:evd47  13,815,000  5.2 
5. Scgn/Pictet Africa Non Tax 6275j Pictetmast  7,604,968  2.9 
6. Scgn/Citibank Kuwait Inv Authority  4,165,700  1.6 
7. Gcb Sta/uniFB00 Provident Fund  2,996,695  1.1 
8. Scgn/Ssbtc For Change Glbl Frontier Mkts , Lp-Cgpa , 
056900600926 2,499,285  0.9 
9. Krohne Fund  2,303,800  0.8 
10. Scgn / Enterprise Life Ass. Co. Policy Holders  2,264,312  0.8 
11. Ghana Reinsurance Company Ltd General Business  1,799,651  0.8 
12. Ghana Cocoa Board  1,600,000  0.6 
13. Enterprise Tier 2 Occupational Pension Scheme  1,519,207  0.6 
14. Scgn/’Epack Investment Fund Limited Transaction E I F L  1,474,200  0.6 
15. Scgn/Ntgs Se Lux Cl A/C Re Ludp Re: Aif Cl 8%  1,470,022  0.6 
16. Scgn/Ssb Eaton Vance Structured , Emerging Market Fund  1,347,533  0.5 
17. Scgn/Ssb Eaton Vance Tax- , Managed Emerging Market Fund  1,285,170  0.5 
18. Ges Occ Pension - Databank Financial Services  1,266,741  0.5 
19. Tema Oil Reﬁnery (Tor) Limited  1,000,000  0.4 
20. African Tiger Holding Limited  995,782  0.4 
Total Top 20  205,083,383  77.4 
Others  59,916,617  22.6 
/uni00A0 Grand Total 265,000,000 100Shareholders’ InformationGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
176
#DoYourThing
)eatures
$irtimeTopup
)undsTransIerBill3ayment0obile0oney6chool)ees2ther6ervicesBalance(nTuiry6tatementYoucoulddosomuch
moreZith...*&%0oEiOe%anNingTakeyourbankZithyouanyZhereanytime.
Visitthenearestbranchtoapply.GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
177Correspondent Banks
LONDON
Ghana International Bank Plc 67 Cheapside, 1st Floor
Regina House
London EC2V 6AZ EnglandBIC: GHIBGB2L
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Citibank N.A. 16th Floor, Zone Street
New York, N.Y. 10043, USABIC: CITIUS33
EUROPE
Commerzbank AG. Kaiserstrasse 16 60261
Frankfurt AM MainGermanyBIC: COBADEFF
BHF Bank AG Frankfurt AM MainGermanyBIC: BHFBDEFF
MTOs/Agents
UNITED KINGDOM
UnityLink Financial Services Ltd. The Triangle, 5-17 
Hammersmith Grove
LondonW6 0LGTel: 0044-20-87722160Email: info@unitylink.com
SPAIN
Money Exchange, S.A P. Santa Maria de la Cabeza
12 28045 Madrid SpainTel: +34917617170
www.moneyspain.netEmail: pnovoa@moneyexchange.netSkype: money.exchange.eurAgents and 
Correspondent BanksGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
178UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
MoneyGram International Money Transfer
MoneyGram Payment 
Systems Inc.
1550 Utica Avenue SouthMinneapolis, MN 55416 USAEmail: www.moneygram.comTel: +17203625024
Familylink Money Transfer Inc. Transfers Inc. USA
1205 College AvenueBronx N.Y. 10456, USATel: 001 718 293 6280Email : familylink@mns.com
Western Union 100 Summit AvenueMontvale, New Jersey 07645USATel: +1-201-263-6384+1-201-263-5949
RIA Money Transfer 6565 Knott AvenueBuena ParkCalifornia 90620U.S.A.Tel: +1 5623452632
SFB Capital Systems LLC 1031 Sterling Road
Suite 201, HerndonVirginia 20170U.S.A.Tel: + 1 7035996975
Transfast / MasterCard 
Transaction Services (US) LIC44 Wall Street, Suite 800
New York, NY 10005USAAgents and Correspondent Banks (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
179BRANCH GPS ADDRESS
A&C Mall GA412-0880
Abeka Lapaz GA-428-6468
Abelemkpe GA-091-3739
Abor VK-2263-7594
Abossey Okai GA-263-4698
Abura Dunkwa CA-0000-1639
Aburi E3-003-4398
Accra New Town GA-045-6621
Accra North GA-100-9433
Achimota GE-370-2646
Ada GY-0772-3463
Adabraka GA-102-3830
Adenta Shopping Centre GD-039-0201
Adjiringano GD-212-4214
Aﬂao VZ-0225-8170
Agogo AN-0005-7030
Agona Ashanti AZ-0000-4116
Agona Swedru CO-0000-9729
Ahinsan AK-305-2032
Airport City GL-116-7441
Terminal 3 GL-125-4096
Akatsi VX-0008-5279
Akim Oda EB-0005-8535
Akosombo EA-0495-7471
Akropong Akwapim E2-0003-2559
Akumadan A6-0000-3963
Akuse EL-1063-9249
Amasaman GW-0023-8235
Anyinam ET-0743-4788
Asafo Market AK-039-1603
Asamankese EW-0001-8055List of BranchesGCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
180BRANCH GPS ADDRESS
Ashaiman GB-029-1204
Mandela Park-Ashaiman GB-005-9057
Assin Foso CR-0008-0889
Axim WN-0000-5802
Bantama AK-059-5478
Bawku UA-0000-1529
Bechem B3-0000-8954
Bekwai Ashanti AB-0003-6475
Berekum BB-0007-6719
Bimbilla NN-0004-7771
Bogoso WP-004-4349
Bole NB-00007-7386
Bolgatanga UB-0003-2952
Boundary Road GA-106-5454
Breman Asikuma CB-0013-7330
Burma Camp GL-088-0982
Cape Coast Coronation Jun CC-001-9477
Cape Coast Main CC-008-5753
Cape Coast University CC-121-1279
Dadieso WU-0007-6342
Dambai VR-00000-4712
Damongo N5-00004-8712
Dansoman GA-539-0336
Dome GE-307-1198
Donkorkrom EP-000-9516
Dormaa-Ahenkro BD-0003-7891
Drobo BI-0007-8239
Duayaw-Nkwanta B2-0002-8068
Dunkwa-On-O/uniFB03n CU-0004-6276
Dzodze VY-0000-1830
East Legon GA-334-6211List of Branches (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
181BRANCH GPS ADDRESS
E/uniFB03duase Ashanti AR-0000-3083
Ejisu AE-0000-0241
Ejura AJ-0018-3770
Elmina CK-0010-1794
Elubo WJ-2710-3555
Enchi WA-00000-5079
Goaso BU-0005-1331
Haatso GE-299-2057
Half Assini WJ-0001-2730
High Street GA-183-1907
Ho Main VH-0002-9142
Ho Market VH-0056-5101
Ho Polytechnic VH-0043-4220
Hohoe VC-0000-6172
Hwidiem BR-0000-4631
Jasikan VJ-0001-7272
Juaso AA-0000-0645
Jubilee House (Suame) AK-030-7597
Kade EK-0021-2750
Kadjebi VM-0000-6816
Kaneshie Industrial Area GA-172-2421
Kaneshie Market GA-358-5820
Kantamanto GA-181-4054
Kasoa Main CX-000-9076
Kasoa Market CG-0702-0050
Kejetia AK-019-7603
Keta VK-0010-8786
Kete Krachi VS–0005–1021
Kibi EE-0005-1120
Kintampo BK-00000-4208
Kisseman GA-344-0742List of Branches (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
182BRANCH GPS ADDRESS
U.s.t.(Kumasi) AK-315-1958
Koforidua EN-010-4324
Koforidua Central EN-010-4424
Konongo AN-0003-3954
Korle Bu GA-269-1628
Kpando VP-0005-3441
Kumasi Main AK-064-4856
Kn Circle GA-100-9235
Labone GL-026-2020
Lawra XL-0000-9934
Legon GA-488-0208
Liberty House GA-141-0278
Madina GD-212-4616
Madina Zongo Junction GM-016-5223
Mampong Akwapim AM-0007-2880
Mampong Ashanti AM-0007-3287
Mankessim CM-0412-4692
Spintex-Martey Tsuru GZ -196-0672
Mim BU-1225-3379
Ministries GA-107-3312
Mpraeso EI-0000-5437
Navrongo UK-0007-7323
New Edubiase A3-0005-5393
New O/uniFB03nso A7-0001-6443
New Tafo EE-1135-6593
Nima GA-012-9063
Nkawie AH-0000-4210
Nkawkaw EJ-0001-0348
Nkoranza BO-0007-0669
Nkwanta VO-00000-2468
Nsawam EG-039-0065List of Branches (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
183BRANCH GPS ADDRESS
Nungua GZ-010-2589
Obuasi AO-028-3084
Okaishie GA-142-7699
Osu GA-115-6609
Osu Oxford Street GA-035-6262
Peki VK-0010-8786
Prestea WP-2580-0759
Republic House GA-105-1077
Ring Road West GA-216-3530
Saboba NX-0003-1299
Tema Safe Bond GT-140-8152
Salaga N4-00007-7512
Saltpond CM-0002-6190 
Sampa BJ-003-8518
Samreboi WY-3374-0525
Sankore BV-2275-2415
Sefwi Wiawso WG-0011-9940
Sekondi WS-019-2158
Sogakope VU-0005-8862
Somanya EY-0000-3518
Spintex Road GZ-142-9946
Suame Magazine AK-030-7249
Suhum ES-0000-6936
Sunyani Main BS-0007-5220
Sunyani Market BS-0008-2307
Takoradi Harbour WS-406-1610
Takoradi Main WS-247-7131
Takoradi Market Circle WS-245-2138
Aboabo-Tamale NT-0005-3831
Tamale Hospital Rd. NT-0061-6472
Tamale Main NT-0003-5485List of Branches (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
184BRANCH GPS ADDRESS
Tamale Market NT-0005-0027
Tantra Hill GW-0845-2608
Tarkwa WT-0005-5782
Tech Junction AK-316-4029
Techiman Main BT-0000-9353
Techiman Market BT-0003-2964
Tema Community 2 GT-071-0033
Tema Fishing Harbour GT- 105 - 4205
Tema Industrial Area GT-070-1829
Tema Main GT-000-7970
Tema Market GT--007-9740
Tema Meridian House GT-021-67-01
Tepa AX-0000-8210
Tesano GA-166-8117
Tetteh Quarshie Circle GA-289-4891
Trade Fair Site GL-035-3019
Tumu XS-00013-0995
Twifo Praso CT-0000-3606
Wa XW-0006-9068
Walewale ND-00002-4241
Weija GS-0164-7269
Wenchi BW-0006-4992
Winneba CE-008-3160
Yeji BP-00000-5390
Yendi NY-0010-6685
Sofoline Branch AK-170-0339
Dzorwulu GA-156-1108
Tema Community 25 GA-0544-4625
Derby Avenue GA-142-9561
Nalerigu TNE-0840-0153
UDS Tamale Campus NT-0273-5541List of Branches (continued)GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
185your bank for life GCB Bank PLC                                                                   
PROXY FORM  
 
I/We ________________________________________________________  being a member(s) of the above- named Company  
hereby appoint __________________________________________________________  or failing whom, the Chairman of the 
Meeting as my/our proxy to vote for me/us on my/our behalf at the 29th Annual General Meeting of the Compan y to be held 
on Friday,  June 30, 2023 at 10.00am .   
This Form is to be used in favour of/against the Resolutions set out in the Agenda.   
 
 
Ordinary  Business  as Ordinary Resolutions   
FOR  
AGAINST 
 
1. To consider and adopt the Financial Statements of the Company for the year ended December 31, 
2022 together with the Reports of the Directors and Auditors thereon.    
 
2. To re -elect Directors  of the Company  retiring by rotation  under the Companies Act 2019 (Act 992)     
 
a) Mr. Osmani Ayuba    
 
b) Alhaji Alhassan Yakubu    
 
c) Mr. Daniel Kwaku Tweneboah Asirifi    
 
d) Hon. Dr. Stephen Amoah    
 
3. To re-elect Directors of the Company in line with the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive 2018  
 
a) Mrs. Lydia Essah    
 
b) Nana Ama Ayensua Saara III    
 
4. To authorize the Directors to fix the remuneration of Auditors    
 
Special Business  as Ordinary Resolutions   
FOR   
AGAINST 
 
 
5. Capital Raise  
a) To authorise the Directors to raise additional equity capital of up to GHS1 billion through a 
renounceable rights issue on such terms (including  the share price, the number of offer shares, 
allotment, and other modalities) as the directors deem fit and proc ure the additional listing of the 
issued ordinary shares on the Ghana Stock Exchange.  
   
b) To authorise the Directors to raise any shortfall (in the required  GHS1 billion under the rights 
issue) through either a single or multiple private placement o f ordinary shares to investors on 
such terms (including the share price  and other modalities) as the Directors deem fit and to 
procure the listing (by introduction) of the issued ordinary shares on the Ghana Stock Exch ange, 
provided that the private placement(s) shall be implemented and completed within 12 months of 
the close of the rights issue.  
  
 
 
    
c) To authorise the Directors to raise any shortfall (in the required GHS1 billion under the rights 
issue and the private placement of ordinary shares) through either a single or multiple private 
placement of non -redeemable, non -cumulative and convertible preference shares to investors on 
such terms (including the coupon rate and other modalities) as the Directors deem fi t and to 
procure the listing (by introduction) of the issued preference shares on the Ghana Stock 
Exchange, provided that the private placement(s) shall be implemented and completed with in 12 
months of the close of the rights issue and the aggregate amount  to be raised shall not exceed 
GHS250 million.  
   
GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
186your bank for life  
Special Business  as Special Resolution   
FOR   
AGAINST 
 
 
6. Amendment to the Bank’s Constitution  
a) To amend paragraph 12 of the Company’s constitution by deleting and replacing it with the 
following: 
“The Company may issue preference shares to existing members or any other persons not 
exceeding an aggregate of 5 00,000,000 shares as authorised under paragraph 9 of this 
Constitution”. 
   
b) To amend paragraph 13 of the Company’s constitution by deleting and replacing it wit h the 
following: 
“The commercial terms of any preference shares issued by the Company shall be as agreed 
between the Company and the relevant person (and in accordance with applicable law, including 
any prevailing capital requirement directives of the Bank  of Ghana) and set out in relevant 
agreement". 
   
 
 
DATED THE ______ DAY OF _______________, 2023.                             
 
 ______________________________ 
SIGNATURE 
 
 
Notes:  
1. Please indicate with an “X” in the spaces above how you wish your vote to be cast. Unless otherwise instructed, the 
Proxy will vote as he thinks fit.  
 
2. If executed by a corporate body,  the form should be completed by the signature of a duly authorized officer and should 
be accompanie d by a resolution in accordance with Section 11 of Schedule 8 of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) . 
 
3. To be valid, this Proxy form must be filled out, signed and lodged (together with any authority under which it is 
signed) with the Registrars at GCB Bank PLC, High Street, Accra not later than 10.00am on June 28, 2023. ,nvestright
(nMoygenerationalZealthZith...
GCB Wealthmaster 
Policy. #GCBBancassurance
GCBBancassurance3olicies...
Child(ducation)uneral3olicy:ealthmaster
Visitthenearestbranchtoapply.GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
187
,nvestright
(nMoygenerationalZealthZith...
GCB Wealthmaster 
Policy. #GCBBancassurance
GCBBancassurance3olicies...
Child(ducation)uneral3olicy:ealthmaster
Visitthenearestbranchtoapply.GCB Bank PLC Annual Report 2022
188


Extracted from: SG_Ghana_2021_Financials_with_signature.pdf
2021 ANNUAL 
REPORT AND 
FINANCIAL 
STATEMENTSTABLE OF
CONTENTS
Our purpose and values in the service of our clients
Notice and agenda for  annual general meeting 
Corporate information
Profile of  the  board
Key management personnel
Board chairperson’s statement 
Managing director’s review 
Report of the directors
Statement of directors’ responsibilities
Independent auditors’ report
Statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive incomeFinancial highlights
Statement of financial position
Statement of changes in equity
Statement of cash flows
Notes to the financial statements
Proxy form
Resolutions
Branch network02
04
05
06
09
12
16
20
44
46
5149
52
53
54
55
115
116
118
1
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCOUR PURPOSE  
Building together with our clients, a better and sustainable 
future through responsible and innovative financial solutions.
OUR MISSION STATEMENT  
The Bank’s mission is to create the preferred banking institution, 
which employs team spirit, innovation, responsibility & 
commitment to provide quality products and services that best 
satisfy the needs of our customers.
OUR VALUES: TEAM SPIRIT , INNOVATION, RESPONSIBILITY & 
COMMITMENT
Team Spirit:  is characterised by a sense of service which 
is intended to make  Societe Generale Ghana the leading 
customer relationship bank and making listening to customers 
and all other stakeholders, information sharing and solidarity 
as well as cooperation and internal pooling of resources its 
main priority. 
 
Innovation:  which is providing added value and greater 
simplification to serve clients with a framework that takes into 
account reputational risk.
 
Responsibility:  that consists of taking decisions quickly 
to meet the needs of clients and the organisation without 
sacrificing their long-term objectives. It also involves having the 
courage both individually and collectively to take responsibility 
for actions and decisions and finally attaching as much 
importance to results as well as consequences of decisions for 
all stakeholders.
Commitment:  which makes it possible to make a difference 
and to contribute to the success of clients and the Bank thereby 
resulting in a high level of service and performance.
OUR  PURPOSE
Helping our clients build the future
We reaffirm the importance of our role as bankers which is 
to help our clients invest in a more sustainable future. By 
supporting their projects and helping them grow, we are firmly 
committed to those who move the world forward.
A trusted partner
Societe Generale Ghana puts value creation for its customers 
at the heart of its business model, placing itself alongside 
entrepreneurs growing their businesses and developing their 
projects. The Bank offers added value in every aspect of its 
business and in each of its business lines:
 y making life easier for our customers: assisting our 
customers by providing them with the right service at the 
right time, combining the best that humans and digital  
technology have to offer; y advising: putting our expertise to work for all customer 
segments by tailoring our support to the issues facing each 
one of them;
 y connecting people and businesses: creating a link between 
those who have projects and those who can help them;
 y using our resources responsibly: putting our balance sheet 
to work to help those who want to invest;
 y evaluating and managing risks: managing risks in  a 
rigorous and responsible manner over the long term;
 y safeguarding interests: undertaking a commitment to 
respect and protect everyone’s interests while aiming for 
the highest standards of security and quality of service.
 
Customer satisfaction: A priority
Customer satisfaction is regularly measured and has increased 
or remained steady at a high level in all our business lines. The 
Bank has adopted a structured approach to monitor customer 
satisfaction using a range of tools: opinion surveys, surprise 
visits, questionnaires and net promoter score ratings. A 
formalized process to address complaints by our quality team is 
in place with the protection of our clients being at the forefront 
of all our operations. We are committed to safeguarding their 
interests, particularly in light of the growing risks associated 
with cybercrime.
Corporate culture and ethics
For Societe Generale Ghana, instilling a culture of responsibility 
based on strong values, notably through our Code of Conduct, 
means observing the highest standards of integrity and 
behaviour in all business lines and countries where we operate. 
The Bank has established ethical principles and ensures that 
all our staff comply with them. As a responsible employer, 
we are committed to ensuring the respect of human rights 
and implement appropriate measures in instances where our 
principles are not adhered to.
Expertise and skills
The Bank pays particular attention to the quality of our 
dialogue with staff representative bodies, especially with 
respect to addressing the challenges of changing business and 
employment trends. Anticipating the Bank’s business needs, 
hiring and helping our staff develop their careers, particularly 
through training and internal professional mobility and 
promotions, are essential for attracting and retaining talent 
and strengthening staff loyalty.
 
Diversity and inclusion
Building a company that is inclusive and reflects the diversity 
of its customers is one of the Bank’s key ambitions. Above 
and beyond regulatory obligations, Societe Generale treats 
diversity and inclusion for all as strategic issues for today and 
tomorrow, and takes proactive steps in this regard.OUR PURPOSE AND VALUES IN 
THE SERVICE OF OUR CLIENTS
2
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCPerformance and compensation
To attract and retain talents, Societe Generale Ghana 
implements an attractive and fair pay policy, which recognizes 
each staff member’s contribution to the Bank’s performance 
while ensuring the appropriate management of risks.Health and safety
Societe Generale Ghana is committed to developing a respectful 
and safe working environment to enable every one of its staff  
members to work in conditions that are positive for their health 
and well-being, in particular by promoting the appropriate 
work-life balance.Our purpose and values in the service of our our clients cont’d
3
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT the 42nd Annual General Meeting (“AGM”) of the Shareholders of Societe Generale Ghana PLC (“the 
Company”) will be held VIRTUALLY and streamed live on https://sgghanaagm.com from the Head Office of Societe Generale Ghana 
PLC on Thursday 29 September 2022 at 11:00am to transact the following business: 
ORDINARY BUSINESS: ORDINARY RESOLUTIONS
1. To receive and adopt the Financial Statements of the Company (together with the reports of the directors and the auditors of 
the Company) for the year ended 31 December 2021. 
2. To declare a Dividend
3. To re-elect the following Directors retiring by rotation pursuant to Section 60 of the Company’s Constitution who being 
eligible offer themselves for re-election.
 • Mr Arnaud De Gaudemaris
 • Mr Georges Wega
 • Mr Hakim Ouzzani
 
4. To elect the following Directors appointed during the year and retiring in accordance with Section 60 of the Company’s 
Constitution:
 • Mrs Juliana Asante
 • Mr Yvon Puyou
5. To approve Directors’ fees
6. To appoint Auditors.
7. To authorize the Directors to determine the remuneration of the Auditors. 
Dated, this 24 day of  February 2022
.................................................................
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD
ANGELA NANANSAA BONSU
THE SECRETARY
A member of the Company entitled to attend and vote is entitled to appoint a Proxy to attend and vote instead of him.  A Proxy 
need not be a member.  A form of Proxy is attached to the Annual Report  for it to be valid for the purpose of the meeting it must be 
completed and deposited with the Registrars, NTHC Limited, Martco House, PO Box KA 9563, Airport Accra, Ghana not less than 48 
hours before the appointed time of the meeting.
+233 302214314
sgghana.info@socgen.com
www.societegenerale.ghana.gh
@societegenerale.ghana
Societe Generale Ghana
@SG_GhanaNOTICE AND AGENDA FOR
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
4
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCBOARD OF DIRECTORS       DATE APPOINTED
1. Margaret Boateng Sekyere -  Board Chair Independent Non-Executive 15 September 2020
2. Hakim Ouzzani -     Managing Director   23 January 2017
3. Laurette Korkor Otchere -    Non-Executive    6 September 2017 
4. Agnes Tauty Giraldi -   Non-Executive    1 October 2018  
5. Georges Wega -    Non-Executive      16 August 2019
6. Arnaud De Gaudemaris -  Non-Executive     16 August 2019
7. Fosuhene Acheampong -   Non-Executive    3 June 2020 
8. Francis Awua-Kyerematen -   Independent Non Executive  23 February 2021  
9. Juliana Asante                                - Independent Non-Executive  8 November 2021 
10. Yvon Puyou - Non-Executive Director   24 January 2022
11. Martine Hitti -  Resigned February 2021   
COMPANY SECRETARY  Angela Nanansaa Bonsu
 Societe Generale Ghana PLC
 2nd Crescent, Royalt Castle Road 
 Ring Road Central
 P .O. Box 13119
 Accra, Ghana
REGISTERED OFFICE  2nd Crescent, Royalt Castle Road 
 Ring Road Central, Accra
 P .O. Box 13119
 Accra, Ghana
AUDITORS  Ernst & Young Chartered Accountants
 60 Rangoon Lane 
 Cantonments City, Cantonments
 Accra, Ghana
REGISTRARS  NTHC Limited
 NTHC House
 18 Gamel Abdul Nasser Avenue
 Ringway Estate Accra 
 P .O. Box KA 9563
 Airport, Accra
 Ghana
COUNTRY OF INCORPORATION  Ghana, Accra
HOLDING COMPANY  SG Financial Services, Holding Company
UL TIMATE HOLDING COMPANY  Societe Generale incorporated in FranceCORPORATE INFORMATION
5
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCPROFILE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MARGARET BOATENG SEKYERE (Chairperson)
HAKIM OUZZANI  (Managing Director)   
JULIANA ASANTE (Member)
YVON PUYOU  (Member)FRANCIS AWUA-KYEREMATEN  (Member)
GEORGES WEGA  (Member) LAURETTE OTCHERE  (Member) AGNES TAUTY GIRALDI  (Member)
ARNAUD DE GAUDEMARIS  (Member) FOSUHENE ACHEAMPONG  (Member)
ANGELA NANANSAA BONSU  (Company Secretary)EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
INDEPENDENT NON-EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
NON-EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
BOARD SECRETARY
6
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCMargaret Boateng Sekyere: Board Chair.   She received a 
Bachelor’s degree in Accounting and an MBA from Howard 
University in Washington D.C in 1985 and 1987 respectively. 
From 1985 to 1989 she was in Public Accounting and Mortgage 
Banking in the USA after which she joined Price Waterhouse 
in Ghana as a Management Consultant with special focus on 
Financial Management Reviews and Assessments of donor 
funding to public sector institutions. With over 30 years of 
experience in private and public sector management, she 
was instrumental in the development of public sector reforms 
in Sierra Leone in the early 1990s and in Ghana from 2004 to 
2007.  In 1993, she was recruited by the Government of Sierra 
Leone to manage a 5 year Public Sector Program funded by 
the World Bank. She served as  a Senior Resource Management 
Officer of the World Bank Office in Ghana from 1998 to 2003. 
Whilst there, she managed the administrative services and 
accounting team in the Country Office including training, 
systematic back-up and replacement planning. She played a 
key role in the coaching and development of newly recruited 
resource management staff for Country Offices in the Africa 
Region – South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe, Malawi, Nigeria, 
Ethiopia and Kenya.  From 2007 to 2013, she joined a team 
to set up an Asset Management Firm – OAK Partners Ltd., - 
providing financing for private real estate projects in Accra. 
During the period of 2013-2018, she was an Executive Director 
of Finance and Administration for Belstar Capital. At Belstar, 
she also played a key role as a Licensed Investment Advisory 
Representative of the Securities and Exchange Commission, 
responsible for compliance of financial regulatory matters.  She 
was nominated to the Board of Directors on 12 July 2019 with 
Bank of Ghana granting approval on 20 November 2019. Bank 
of Ghana further approved her appointment as Board Chair on 
15 September 2020.
Hakim Ouzzani: Managing Director.  He holds a Bachelor 
of Arts degree in Economics and a Master of Arts degree in 
Organisation Sociology from the Ecole Nationale Superieure d’ 
Administration et de Gestation National School of Management 
and Administration.  He also holds a Diploma in Banking and 
Finance from the Institute of Development Finance Tunis. 
Mr Ouzzani has a Diploma of Higher Education from the 
Arab Maghred Development Financing Institute. Before his 
appointment as Managing Director, he was a Senior Executive 
Regional Manager with Societe Generale International Banking 
Financial Services in charge of Cameroun, Chad, Congo 
Brazzaville, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana and Guinea Conakry. 
In 1998, he was the New Products Development Manager at 
the Union Bank.  He has worked as a Professor at the Ecole 
Superieure de Banque.   He also worked with the Central Bank 
of Algerie as a Senior Officer Loans & Refinancing Direction 
and Licencing & Regulatory Function. From 2000 to 2002, he 
managed the Corporate Branch of the Union Bank Brokerage. 
From 2012 to 2016, he was the CEO of Societe Generale Chad.
He also held various positions within Societe Generale as 
Group Deputy General Manager SG Algerie, Network and Sales Manager SG Algerie and Network Development Manager SG 
Algerie.  Mr Ouzzani was nominated to the Board of Directors 
of Societe Generale Ghana on 16 November 2016 with the Bank 
of Ghana granting approval to the said appointment on 23 
January 2017.
Georges K. T . Wega: Non Executive Director.  He holds 
an Engineering degree and a Master’s degree in Industrial 
Engineering from the University of Quebec, Canada. His career 
spans over 22 years’ having worked in several capacities in 
organizations around the world. He has acquired a long span 
of industrial and banking experience during his career. Mr 
Wega is the Deputy Head of International Retail Banking for 
Africa, the Mediterranean Basin & Overseas (Societe Generale). 
Among the places he has worked are Postes Canada (Ottawa), 
General Electric (Brussels and Amsterdam), Barclays Bank PLC 
in London and United Bank for Africa (UBA Nigeria). He also 
served as the Chief Executive Officer of UBA Cameroon for 4 
years. He then joined Societe Generale in 2014 as Deputy CEO 
of Societe Generale Cameroun, before being appointed Chief 
Executive Officer of Societe Generale Senegal in August 2016. 
He was nominated to the Board of Directors on 22 November 
2018 with Bank of Ghana granting approval on 16 August 2019.
Laurette Korkor Otchere:  Non Executive Director  She is a 
Barrister at Law and a Deputy Director General Operations and 
Benefits at Social Security and National Insurance Trust.  She 
holds a Juris Doctor; a Bachelor of Arts in Economics and is a 
Certified Professional in Human Resources (SHRM-CP).  She is 
a member of the Ghana Bar, State of New Jersey Bar and the 
United States District Court, District of New Jersey.  She is an 
Adjunct Professor at Rutgers University School of Management 
and Labour Relations and the Society for Human Resource 
Management.  She has extensive working and professional 
experience internationally and locally.  She joined the Board of 
Directors in July 2017 with Bank of Ghana granting approval on 
6 September 2017.
Agnes Tauty Giraldi: Non Executive Director.    She is the Head 
of Export Finance Africa, Europe and Structured Trade Finance, 
Societe Generale Corporate and Investment Banking. She has 
over 23 years’ experience in the Corporate Investment Banking 
sector with an extensive experience of Structured Trade and 
Export Finance. She has solid experience in emerging markets 
and has led several deals involving sovereign, sub-sovereign, 
public and private corporates. She is currently the Head of 
Export Finance Africa, Europe and Structured Trade Finance, 
Societe Generale Paris. Within the Societe Generale Group, 
she has held the following positions; Deputy Head Origination 
Export Finance, Head of European Origination Export Finance, 
Country Manager in the Europe and Central Asia Desk, 
Societe Generale Paris, Vice President Societe Generale Paris 
responsible  for the execution of the documentation (Loan 
documentation, Credit Insurance, securities, etc.), Corporate Profile Of The Board Of Directors cont’d
7
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCRelationship Manager, Societe Generale London Relationship 
Manager SMEs, French Network, Societe Generale.   She was 
nominated to the Board of Directors on 11 April 2018 with Bank 
of Ghana granting approval on 1 October 2018.
Arnaud De Gaudemaris: Non Executive Director.  He holds 
an Engineering Degree from ISEP Paris.  He is the current 
Chief of Staff to the Head of Societe Generale for the AFMO 
Region managing about 14,000 staff. He is responsible for 
the organization of strategy preparation meetings, internal 
management meetings and also the African Region strategy.  
He was nominated to the Board of Directors on 28 November 
2018 with Bank of Ghana granting approval on 16 August 2019.
Fosuhene Acheampong: Non Executive Director.  He is a 
chartered accountant by profession and holds an MBA in Finance 
from the Lagos State University and a Bsc in Accounting from 
the University of Lagos. He is currently the Director of Finance 
and Administration at the Cedar Seal Company Limited.  From 
2001-2004, he was the Audit Manager at Deloitte & Touche . He 
was the Chief Internal Auditor  at the Minerals Commission from 
2004-2005 and went on to become the Director of Finance from  
2005 - 2006.From 2010 to 2016, he held the following positions 
in the Access Bank Group; Head Business Banking and Regional 
Head Western Region. Before the name change to Access Bank, 
Mr Acheampong worked as Area Manager of Intercontinental 
Bank for the Western and Ashanti Regions from 2008 to 2010. 
From 2010 to 2012, he was the Group Head Marketing Division 
Retail of Intercontinental Bank.   He also worked with the Bank 
as Head of Loan Recovery.  He was nominated to the Board in 
April 2020 with Bank of Ghana granting approval of the said 
nomination on 3 June 2020.
Francis Awua-Kyerematen:  Independent Non-Executive 
Director.  He is a Fellow of the Association of Chartered Certified 
Accountants. He holds a Master of Business Administration from 
the University of Chicago Business School and a Bachelor of Arts 
Honours Degree in Accounting and Finance from the Middlesex 
University London UK. He is the Principal Advisor and Managing 
Director for Winchmore Capital. Mr Awua-Kyerematen worked 
as the Country Director for Citibank Ghana from 2008 to 2016. 
Prior to moving to Ghana, he was with Citigroup in the London 
Office responsible for Debt Capital Markets – Middle East & 
African Desk from 2005. He also worked as a Senior Compliance 
Accountant for HM Revenue Customs in the UK from 1998 to 
2003. He also spent a year with Grant Thornton Ipswich Office 
UK as a Senior Corporate Finance and Recovery Associate from 
1997 to 1998. Mr. Awua-Kyerematen was nominated to the 
Board 14 December 2020 with Bank of Ghana granting approval 
to the said nomination on 23 February 2021.Juliana Asante: Independent Non-Executive Director.  She is 
a Chartered Accountant and Change Management Consultant. 
She has a proven record of success in the origination, 
development, implementation and improvement of financial 
accounting and risk management. She has also applied 
these skills in areas of operational processes and systems 
spanning almost three decades. She has held positions such 
as Senior Trainee Accountant/Auditor Deloitte and Touche 
Ghana, Finance Manager, Central Manchester and Manchester 
Children’s University NHS Trust (UK) and Senior Audit Manager, 
Deloitte Ghana. She is currently the Managing Director of 
Integritas Limited, Lead Consultant in the strengthening and 
transformation of Ashesi University’s Finance Function towards 
major investment by the International Finance Corporation 
(IFC). She is also a consultant for Arthur Energy Advisors in 
providing support for the Change Management Program and 
Improved Utility Performance for the Northern Electricity 
Distribution Company Limited.  She was nominated to the 
Board on  30 June  2021 with Bank of Ghana granting approval 
on 8 November 2021.
Yvon Puyou:  Non-Executive Director.   He holds a Master of 
Business Administration from EDHEC Sophia Antipolis France 
and a Master’s Degree in Computer Science from the Ecole 
Centrale de Marseille- Marseille, France. He held the position of 
Regional Head of Information Technology ,SG Singapore from 
1995 to 2000. From 2000 to 2003, he held the position as Senior 
Executive Director (Member of the Executive Committee) of 
SG Private Banking (Switzerland) S.A.Geneva, Switzerland  .  
Mr. Yvon Puyou was the Global Chief Information Officer at SG 
Private Banking, Paris France from 2003 to 2005.  He was the 
Head of Global IT , Head for Core Banking System, Risks and 
Finance solutions, Societe Generale Paris France from 2005 to 
2009. He held the position of Chief Information Officer,  Societe 
Generale Prague Czech Republic from 2009 to 2015. He was the 
Chief Operating Officer for Societe Generale Splitska Banka 
from 2015 to 2017.   He is currently the Chief Information Officer 
at Societe Generale African Mediterranean& Overseas.  Mr. 
Yvon Puyou was nominated to the Board of Directors on 14 
September 2021 with Bank of Ghana granting approval for the 
appointment on 24 January 2022. Profile Of The Board Of Directors cont’d
8
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCHakim Ouzzani: Managing Director.  He holds a Bachelor 
of Arts degree in Economics and a Master of Arts degree in 
Organisation Sociology from the Ecole Nationale Superieure d’ 
Administration et de Gestation National School of Management 
and Administration.  He also holds a Diploma in Banking and 
Finance from the Institute of Development Finance Tunis. 
Mr Ouzzani has a Diploma of Higher Education from the 
Arab Maghred Development Financing Institute. Before his 
appointment as Managing Director, he was a Senior Executive 
Regional Manager with Societe Generale International Banking 
Financial Services in charge of Cameroun, Chad, Congo 
Brazzaville, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana and Guinea Conakry. 
In 1998, he was the New Products Development Manager at 
the Union Bank.  He has worked as a Professor at the Ecole 
Superieure de Banque.   He also worked with the Central Bank 
of Algerie as a Senior Officer Loans & Refinancing Direction 
and Licencing & Regulatory Function. From 2000 to 2002, he 
managed the Corporate Branch of the Union Bank Brokerage. 
From 2012 to 2016, he was the CEO of Societe Generale Chad.  
He also held various positions within Societe Generale as 
Group Deputy General Manager SG Algerie, Network and Sales 
Manager SG Algerie and Network Development Manager SG 
Algerie.  Mr. Ouzzani was nominated to the Board of Directors 
of Societe Generale Ghana on 16 November 2016 with the Bank 
of Ghana granting approval to the said appointment on 23 
January 2017.
Francois Pousse: Deputy Managing Director.   He holds a 
Master of Science in Finance and Economics from the London 
School of Economics (UK) and from Ecole Nationale des Ponts 
et Chaussées (FR). Prior to his appointment in SG Ghana, he 
worked for Inspection Generale at Societe Generale Head Office 
in Paris for 9 years, where he performed and supervised audit 
and strategy consulting assignments for the top Management of 
the Societe Generale Group. He has worked in various fields in 
the banking sector such as IT transformation in retail banking, 
market risk on equity derivatives and anti-money laundering. 
Working in diverse business environments such as Southern 
France, Hong-Kong, Burkina-Faso, the UK and USA has added 
to his wealth of knowledge.  He eventually became one of 
the Managing directors at Inspection, with shared oversight 
over a team of about 120 people made up of Inspectors, data 
scientists and support staff directly reporting to Global Head of 
Inspection. Mr Pousse is also the Treasurer of the Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry France – Ghana (CCIFG).
Bernice Allotey: Chief Operating Officer.   She holds an 
Executive Masters in Business Administration (Finance) and BSC 
in Computer Science and Statistics both from the University of 
Ghana, Legon.  She is a proven Project/Programme Manager 
and a Lean Six Sigma Green belt trained.  Over her 24 years’ 
experience in the Banking Industry, she has built strong expertise 
in Project/Change Management, delivering and overseeing 
strategic projects that cuts across all the various functions in the Bank ; Project Portfolio Management, Information System 
Management, Business Process Management and Banking 
operations. Before her appointment as the Chief Operating 
Officer, she was the Head of Organization and Projects in 
Societe Generale Ghana from 2008 to 2018 and was responsible 
for the implementation of the bank’s Project Portfolio by 
ensuring overall alignment of the organizational structures to 
the business strategy.  As the Chief Operating Officer, she now 
oversees the following strategic departments; Organization 
and Projects, Information Systems & Technology, Information 
security, Operations, Logistics and Physical Security.
  
Angela N. Bonsu: Company Secretary General Manager.    
Ms Bonsu holds a Master of Business Administration from the 
Middlesex University Business School, London and an honours 
degree in Law from the Birkbeck College, University of London.  
She is a professionally qualified member of the Institute of 
Directors Ghana.  Ms Bonsu holds an ACAMS Certification for Anti-
Bribery and Corruption. She has rich professional experience in 
Company Secretaryship, Compliance, Corporate Governance, 
Business Integration, Global Employee Share Ownership 
Programmes, Legal Administration, Human Resource, and 
Project Management with over 20 years’ experience working 
in various capacities. As the Company Secretary for a Bank 
listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange, she also has oversight 
responsibility for the Legal Department, Environmental & 
Social Management Systems, Sustainable Development & 
Corporate Social Responsibility.  She furthermore has oversight 
responsibility for the Permanent Control Department. 
Felix Adjaku: Chief Finance Officer.  He is a fellow of the 
Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA) UK and 
holds a Bachelor’s degree in Sociology from the University 
of Ghana. Felix has worked in various departments of the 
bank namely Corporate banking as a Credit Analyst, Treasury 
Department as an Asset and Liability Managment Officer and 
as a Branch Officer with the Retail Banking Department. Before 
being appointed the Chief Finance Officer he was the Head of 
Financial Reporting and Performance Measurement. Felix has 
over 10 years’ experience in banking.
Kwame Anterkyi: Chief Risk Officer in charge of Credit 
and Market Risk.   He is a graduate of the Kwame Nkrumah 
University of Science and Technology Ghana with a Bsc. in Civil 
Engineering and a Master of Business Administration (Finance 
Option) from the Ghana Institute of Management and Public 
Administration (GIMPA). He is also a professionally qualified 
member of the Chartered Institute of Bankers (Ghana).  Kwame 
Anterkyi has over 17 years banking experience specializing in 
Corporate and Institutional Banking anchored on a strong 
credit risk analysis background having worked as a Credit 
Analyst and in Senior Relationship Management positions. He 
is a member of the Credit and Market Risk Committee of the 
Bank.KEY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL
9
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCAbena Asare-Menako: Chief Compliance Officer.   She  is an 
experienced banking professional with expertise in Resource 
Management, Retail Banking, Business/Corporate Banking, 
Sales, Marketing, Relationship Management, Card and POS 
(Payments) Management, Banking Operations, Operational 
Risk, Compliance Management and Project Management. She 
possess excellent interpersonal, analytical and organizational 
skills with the ability to excel within highly competitive 
environments where leadership skills are the keys to success. 
She is an effective manager with the proven skills necessary 
to direct, train and motivate human resource to its fullest 
potential while also possessing a strong capacity to focus on 
strategic intent with revenue generation and management of 
cost. She is also responsible for ensuring the Bank complies 
with all relevant anti-money laundering regulations by 
providing advice to management and ensuring compliance 
with local and related Financial Security Topics including but 
not limited to Anti-Money Laundering, Sanctions and Embargo, 
KYC, Correspondent Banking. She holds a Masters degree in 
Finance from University of Leicester, U.K. and is an Associate 
of the Chartered Institute of Bankers, Ghana and the Institute 
of Marketing U.K.
Catherine Johnson: General Manager Treasury and Global 
Markets.   She holds a BSc Accounting Degree from Cardiff  
University in Wales and is a member of the Association 
Cambiste Internationale (ACI) based in Paris. She also holds 
a Master’s Degree in International Securities, Investments 
and Banking from the ISMA Centre, Henley Business School, 
UK with a special focus on Financial Engineering and Fixed 
Income Solutions. She has over 20 years’ extensive commercial 
banking experience both in Ghana and internationally. 
Her vast experience over the years cover areas of Strategy, 
Business Development, Treasury Management, Corporate 
Banking, Balance Sheet Risk Management and Market/Trading 
activities. She is currently in charge of managing the assets and 
liabilities structure of the bank and has direct responsibility for 
developing market/trading teams, products/solutions, funding 
and the general trading framework. She also manages key 
treasury relationships with the Regulator, Financial Institutions 
and Clients.
Obed Hoyah: General Manager Retail Business.  He holds a 
Master of Science degree in Management from the University of 
Maryland University College (Graduate School of Management 
& Technology) in Maryland, USA and a Bachelor of Science 
degree in Accounting from Rhode Island College, Providence, 
RI, USA.  Obed is a seasoned banker who has worked in different 
capacities in the bank, as Head of SME, Pre-Recoveries, and 
Credit & Operational Risk before taking on a role at Retail 
Banking.  He was the Project Manager for the RUBI Project, 
which transformed the structure of the network from an 
Operational organization to a Sales and Service outfit.  He has 
over 20 years’ experience in the industry both in Ghana and the 
USA, where he started his banking career.Dorcas Quaye:  Head, Human Resource Management.  She 
holds a BA in Social Sciences from the Kwame Nkrumah 
University of Science and Technology, and a certified AML/ 
SANCTIONS and EMBARGO practitioner. She has over 30 
years of rich and full rounded banking experience in Branch 
Management, Retail and SME businesses, and Operational 
Risk Management. As a branch manager, she managed three 
branches, and thereafter she was appointed as the Head of 
the SME Business Banking Unit. She was appointed the Head 
of Compliance, AML & CFT when the unit was created in the 
Bank in 2010. In October 2015, she was appointed as the Head 
of Permanent Control and Operational, Risk, with oversight 
responsibility for Managerial Supervision, Business Continuity 
and Crisis Management, Compliance Anti Money Laundering 
and Operational Risk. In 2020 Dorcas was appointed Head 
Human Resource Management.
Frank Lawoe: Head, Internal Audit.  A Chartered Accountant 
by profession,he holds a Bachelor of Commerce degree from 
the University of Cape Coast and Executive MBA in Finance from 
the University of Ghana. He is also a Member of the Institute 
of Chartered Accountants (Ghana) and Institute of Internal 
Auditors (Ghana). He has over 17 years’ experience in banking 
with strong and proven expertise in Internal Audit, Credit 
Risk Management, Retail and Corporate Banking, and Debt 
Recovery. 
Lavana Gwira Tamattey: Head, Permanent Control.  She 
holds a degree in Economics & English and a Master of Business 
Administration (Finance) both from the University of Ghana. 
She is a banker with thirty years’ experience spanning various 
departments in Societe Generale Ghana PLC. She has served 
as Branch Manager for three distinct branches over the years. 
During the AKOBEN project, which saw the Bank change its 
banking software from Flexcube to Amplitude from 2007 to 2009, 
she worked as the Front Office Business Line Manager (Retail 
Banking). In 2010, she was appointed as Head of Marketing and 
was responsible for the sale of Institutional Loans, Management 
of the Contact/Call Centre, Communication on Products & 
Services, and Branding. Other capacities in which she has 
worked from 2012 to 2019 include Deputy Head, Retail Credit 
Monitoring, Head, Retail Credit Administration and Head, Retail 
Operations.
She was transferred to the Permanent Control Department as 
Head, Operational Risk in December 2019. She was appointed 
Acting Head of the department in June 2021. She is currently 
responsible for Operational Risk assessment and management, 
Level 1 Permanent Control Implementation and Business 
Continuity Management. She is also entrusted with the 
responsibility of seeing to the quality of Customer Files within 
Societe Generale Ghana as defined by the Group and local 
Regulators. She was appointed as Head Permanent Control on 
1 February 2022.Key Management Personnel cont’d
10
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCLawrence Ribeiro: Head, Logistics & Support.  He holds 
a Post Graduate Diploma in Legal Studies from the Ghana 
School of Law, Executive Master of Business Administration 
(Finance option) from the University of Ghana, Legon and 
BSc Electrical/Electronic Engineering degree from the Kwame 
Nkrumah University of Science and Technology. In the last 
seventeen years, he has built extensive experience in enterprise 
IT management and service delivery. He is also experienced 
in Logistics and Estate management. He worked in various 
capacities as Head of Data Centre Operations, Head of Network 
and System, Head of IT Security and Business Continuity 
Planning and Head of Information Systems and Technology.
Adwoa Asieduaa Ntirakwa: Head Organisation & Projects.   
She is a product of the University of Ghana Business School 
with a BSc in Banking and Finance and a Master of Business 
Administration (Project Management Option) from the Ghana 
Institute of Management and Public Administration. She is also 
a professionally qualified member of the Chartered Institute of 
Bankers (Ghana) and is a Lean Six Sigma trained – Green Belt. 
She is also a coach in Prism Methodology and has trained a 
number of staff members on the Prism Methodology. Adwoa has 
16 years’ experience in Banking in the areas of Retail Banking 
and Project Management.  In her current role as the Head of 
Organization and Projects, she is responsible for the Bank’s 
Project Management Portfolio and Methods/ Procedures, ensuring that Projects are delivered for the Banks Functional 
Teams in line with their Business strategy.
Elikplim Muzzu: Head, Marketing Multichannels and Quality.   
Mr Muzzu is a seasoned, multi-disciplinary marketing 
management, corporate communications and change 
management executive with over 22 years proven record of 
growing lasting brands and managing multi-million dollar 
projects across Ghana. With a passion for brands and a 
strong business judgement and interpersonal skills, he has 
successfully managed many client projects and developed 
many a successful brands on the local market and in the process 
turning these brands into profitable and successful businesses. 
A consummate professional, he has within the last decade 
and a half worked within the Ghanaian banking industry and 
held senior executive roles in United Bank for Africa (UBA) 
Ghana Limited and First Atlantic Bank Limited, responsible for 
Marketing, Corporate Communications and Service Quality. 
He also worked at Barclays Bank Ghana Limited where he 
served as the Programme Manager for Brand and Name 
Change during the bank’s brand transition to Absa Bank Ghana 
Limited. He holds a Master’s Degree in International Affairs 
from the University of Ghana, Centre for International Affairs 
and Diplomacy in addition to a Master’s Degree in Business 
Administration from GIMPA. Key Management Personnel cont’d
11
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCDistinguished Shareholders, I am delighted to welcome you 
to our 42nd Virtual Annual General Meeting and to present to 
you the Annual Report and Audited Financial Statements of 
your Company for the financial year ended 31 December 2021.  
Your Company’s financial performance remained solid within a 
challenging year due to the Covid-19 Pandemic.  
• Macro-economic Environment:
• Operating Environment
• 2021 Operating  Results
• Dividend
• Share Performance
• Board of Directors
• Corporate Governance
• Outlook for 2022
•  Appreciation
Macro-economic Environment
The global economic recovery is continuing at a good 
momentum, though restricted by the global health crisis. 
The Delta variant and the more recent Omicron variant of the 
virus have disrupted the health of the global economy, leading 
to longer-than-expected supply disruptions, inflation and 
unemployment. 
In the first half of this year, global GDP growth was generally 
in line with expectation. However, during the second half, 
disruptions mainly caused by the resurgence of COVID cases 
led to a reduction in global manufacturing and industrial 
production. Meanwhile, global inflation continued to rise 
during the second half of the year on account of varied factors 
across the globe-  fossil fuel price hikes, food price increases, 
supply disruptions and high prices of imported goods amongst 
others.
Overall, a full return to normalcy has been held back and risks 
to global economic prospects have increased. According to the 
IMF, global growth is estimated at 5.9 percent in 2021 and is 
expected to moderate to 4.4 percent in 2022, Inflation is also 
expected to remain elevated in the near term  averaging 3.9 
percent in advanced economies and 5.9 percent in emerging 
market and developing economies in 2022.
It is noteworthy however that the outlook incorporates 
anticipated effects of mobility restrictions, border closures, 
and health impacts from the spread of the Omicron variant. 
According to Fitch, most economies will begin treating the virus 
as endemic by the end of the year as vaccines provide sufficient 
protection and new viral treatments help to manage symptoms. 
Data also show that in spite of a sharp rise in infections (with 
Omicron dominating), fatalities remain relatively low, which is 
a very encouraging sign that policymakers will move towards 
more endemic policies and reduce restrictions within their 
economies. With respect to Inflation, Fitch economic analysts 
anticipate that inflation though elevated currently, will gradually converge back towards the target as temporary 
inflation- boosting factors dissipate. Their key view is that the 
inflation peak is nearing and that inflation will start easing over 
the coming months.
Operating Environment
The Ghanaian economy continued its strong recovery from the 
COVID-related economic downturn. The latest Ghana Statistical 
Service update showed that Real GDP growth for the first three 
quarters of 2021 averaged 5.3 percent, compared with an 
average contraction of 0.6 percent recorded in the same period 
of 2020. According to the latest Fitch risk report on Ghana, Real 
GDP growth is estimated at 4.2 percent as at the end of 2021 
and it is projected to accelerate to 4.8 percent in 2022, bolstered 
by a stronger recovery in consumer spending, rising investment 
and solid export performance, notably by the gold sector.
Inflation fell from 10.4 percent in December 2020 to 7.5 percent 
in May 2021. However, it increased continually throughout the 
second half of the year ending in December at 12.6 percent. The 
upward trajectory of inflation in the second half of 2021 is due to 
food supply challenges, rising crude oil prices, and some pass-
through effects of exchange rate depreciation. According to 
Fitch expert analysis, inflation is expected to remain elevated in 
2022. This would be because of sustained high fuel prices, high 
import costs, increased government spending and continuing 
global supply challenges.
With respect to the external sector, the provisional trade 
balance for 2021 recorded a surplus of US$1.1 billion (1.6 
percent of GDP) compared to a surplus of US$2.0 billion (2.8 
percent of GDP) in 2020. The decline in the trade surplus was 
due mainly to increased imports as the economy rebounded. 
The growth of cocoa and crude oil receipts was offset by a 
negative growth in gold receipts. This resulted in a 1.8 percent 
growth in total exports as compared to the 9.7 percent growth 
in imports (attributable to the growth in oil and gas imports).
The lower trade surplus, together with higher investment 
income outflows resulted in a current account deficit of US$2.5 
billion (3.3 percent of GDP) in 2021, higher than the deficit of 
US$2.1 billion (3.1 percent of GDP) recorded in 2020. Significant BOARD CHAIR’S STATEMENT
12
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCinflows into the financial and capital account, more than offset 
the deficit in the current account, resulting in an overall Balance 
of Payments surplus of US$510 million compared with a surplus 
of US$377.5 million recorded in 2020.
The outlook for the external sector in the coming year is positive. 
According to Fitch, Ghana’s current account position will be 
stronger in the coming years, as exports rise on the back of 
growing global demand for commodities and as the country’s 
non-commodity exports sectors continue to develop.
Gross International Reserves as at the end of year 2021 stood at 
US$9.7 billion (equivalent to 4.4 months of import cover). This 
compares with a reserve position of US$8.6 billion (4.0 months 
of import cover) at the end of 2020. The strong reserve position 
provided some buffers for the local currency in 2021. Cumulatively, 
while the Ghana Cedi depreciated by 4.1 percent and 3.1 percent 
against the US Dollar and Pound Sterling, respectively in 2021, it 
appreciated against the Euro by 3.5 percent. In the same period 
of 2020, the Ghana Cedi recorded depreciations of 3.9 percent, 
7.1 percent, and 12.1 percent against the US Dollar, the Pound 
Sterling, and the Euro respectively
This year, the performance of the banking sector showed a 
sustained growth in assets, deposits, and investments alongside 
improvements in the financial soundness indicators. Though 
asset quality continued to reflect the general pandemic-induced 
repayment challenges as well as some bank-specific loan 
recovery challenges, the NPL ratio eased to 15.2 percent at end- 
December from the peak of 17.3 percent in August this year. The 
industry also remained solvent with the average industry CAR of 
19.6 percent well above the 11.5 percent regulatory minimum 
threshold. This performance is expected to continue in 2022, as 
predicted by Fitch analysts.
On the money market, interest rates reflected mixed trends 
across the yield curve. In comparison with last year, the rates 
on 15-year and 20-year bonds remained unchanged and those 
of 2-year and 5-year bonds increased over the period. The rates 
on all other instruments decreased over the year. The interbank 
rate declined as well, induced by structural liquidity on the 
interbank market. This translated into a reduction in the average 
lending rates of banks as at the end of year. In the coming year, 
it is expected that monetary policy tightening will continue. 
According to Fitch, the Bank of Ghana is expected to raise the 
benchmark policy rate  due to inflationary risks during the year. 
This will lead to a steady rise in the average lending rates.
2021 Operating  results
The positive growth trajectory of the bank over the years is a 
testament of the strong controls and policies implemented by 
management. The seemingly perpetual and lingering effects of 
the COVID 19 pandemic has affected the business in some ways 
but we have still undoubtedly remained a force to reckon with 
in the industry. In spite of these challenges however, the Bank recorded a profit after tax of GH ¢184,329,593 which compared 
favorably with the 2020 perfomance of GH ¢154,208,915 showing 
and increase of 19.5%. Total assets grew by 6.3% whilst loans 
and customer deposits saw a decrease of 2.3% and 2.6% 
respectively.
  
Dividend
Shareholders will be informed before AGM of recommended 
dividend per share for the year ended 31 December 2021 to be 
paid after approval from Bank of Ghana.
Share Performance
The share price of the Bank has performed favorably for the year 
under review. The movement from GH ¢0.64 at the beginning of 
the year to GH ¢1.2 at the end of the year was a 46.7 percentage 
increase.
Changes in the Board of Directors: 
Re-election of Directors
In accordance with Section 60 (1) of the Constitution of the 
Bank Mr Hakim Ouzzani; Mr Georges Wega and Mr Arnaud 
De Gaudemaris retire by rotation and being eligible; offer 
themselves for re-election.
Hakim Ouzzani: Managing Director.  He holds a Bachelor of Arts 
degree in Economics and a Master of Arts degree in Organisation 
Sociology from the Ecole Nationale Superieure d’ Administration 
et de Gestation National School of Management and 
Administration.  He also holds a Diploma in Banking and Finance 
from the Institute of Development Finance Tunis. Mr Ouzzani 
has a Diploma of Higher Education from the Arab Maghred 
Development Financing Institute. Before his appointment as 
Managing Director, he was a Senior Executive Regional Manager 
with Societe Generale International Banking Financial Services 
in charge of Cameroun, Chad, Congo Brazzaville, Equatorial 
Guinea, Ghana and Guinea Conakry. In 1998, he was the New 
Products Development Manager at the Union Bank.  He has 
worked as a Professor at the Ecole Superieure de Banque.   He 
also worked with the Central Bank of Algerie as a Senior Officer 
Loans & Refinancing Direction and Licencing & Regulatory 
Function. From 2000 to 2002, he managed the Corporate Branch 
of the Union Bank Brokerage. From 2012 to 2016, he was the 
CEO of Societe Generale Chad.  He also held various positions 
within Societe Generale as Group Deputy General Manager SG 
Algerie, Network and Sales Manager SG Algerie and Network 
Development Manager SG Algerie.  Mr. Ouzzani was nominated 
to the Board of Directors of Societe Generale Ghana on 16 
November 2016 with the Bank of Ghana granting approval to the 
said appointment on 23 January 2017.
Georges K. T . Wega: Non Executive Director.  He holds an 
Engineering degree and a master’s degree in Industrial 
Engineering from the University of Quebec, Canada. His career Board Chair’s Statement cont’d
13
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCspans over 22 years having worked in several capacities in 
organizations around the world. He has acquired a long span 
of industrial and banking experience during his career. Mr 
Wega is the Deputy Head of International Retail Banking for 
Africa, the Mediterranean Basin & Overseas (Societe Generale). 
Among the places he has worked are Postes Canada (Ottawa), 
General Electric (Brussels and Amsterdam), Barclays Bank PLC 
in London and United Bank for Africa (UBA Nigeria). He also 
served as the Chief Executive Officer of UBA Cameroon for 4 
years. He then joined Societe Generale in 2014 as Deputy CEO 
of Societe Generale Cameroun, before being appointed Chief 
Executive Officer of Societe Generale Senegal in August 2016. 
He was nominated to the Board of Directors on 22 November 
2018 with Bank of Ghana granting approval on 16 August 2019.   
                                                                                                                                                                  
Arnaud De Gaudemaris: Non Executive Director.  He holds 
an Engineering Degree from ISEP Paris.  He is the current 
Chief of Staff to the Head of Societe Generale for the AFMO 
Region managing about 14,000 staff. He is responsible for 
the organization of strategy preparation meetings, internal 
management meetings and also the African Region strategy.  
He was nominated to the Board of Directors on 28 November 
2018 with Bank of Ghana granting approval on 16 August 2019.
Election of directors
Appointment of Independent Non-Executive Director
Juliana Asante: Independent Non-Executive Director.  She is 
a Chartered Accountant and Change Management Consultant. 
She has a proven record of success in the origination, 
development, implementation and improvement of financial 
accounting and risk management. She has also applied 
these skills in areas of operational processes and systems 
spanning almost three decades. She has held positions such 
as Senior Trainee Accountant/Auditor Deloitte and Touche 
Ghana, Finance Manager, Central Manchester and Manchester 
Children’s University NHS Trust (UK) and Senior Audit Manager, 
Deloitte Ghana. She is currently the Managing Director of 
Integritas Limited, Lead Consultant in the strengthening and 
transformation of Ashesi University’s Finance Function towards 
major investment by the International Finance Corporation 
(IFC). She is also a consultant for Arthur Energy Advisors in 
providing support for the Change Management Program and 
Improved Utility Performance for the Northern Electricity 
Distribution Company Limited.  She was nominated to the 
Board on  30 June  2021 with Bank of Ghana granting approval 
on 8 November 2021.
Appointment of Non-Executive Director
Yvon Puyou:  Non-Executive Director.  He holds a Master of 
Business Administration from EDHEC Sophia Antipolis France 
and a Master’s Degree in Computer Science from the Ecole 
Centrale de Marseille- Marseille, France. He held the position of 
Regional Head of Information Technology ,SG Singapore from 1995 to 2000. From 2000 to 2003, he held the position as Senior 
Executive Director (Member of the Executive Committee) of 
SG Private Banking (Switzerland) S.A.Geneva, Switzerland . 
Mr. Yvon Puyou was the Global Chief Information Officer at SG 
Private Banking, Paris France from 2003 to 2005. He was the 
Head of Global IT , Head for Core Banking System, Risks and 
Finance solutions, Societe Generale Paris France from 2005 
to 2009. He held the position of Chief Information Officer, 
Societe Generale Prague Czech Republic from 2009 to 2015. He 
was the Chief Operating Officer for Societe Generale Splitska 
Banka from 2015 to 2017. He is currently the Chief Information 
Officer at Societe Generale African Mediterranean& Overseas. 
Mr. Yvon Puyou was nominated to the Board of Directors on 14 
September 2021 with Bank of Ghana granting approval for the
appointment on 24 January 2022.
Corporate governance
Our Bank is committed to ensuring effective corporate 
governance and sound risk management, which are of 
fundamental importance in banking business. The Companies 
Act, 2019 (Act 992); The Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking 
Institutions Act 2016 (Act 930); the Bank of Ghana’s Corporate 
Governance Directive 2018; the Securities Industry Act 2016 
(Act 292); the Securities & Exchange Commission the Corporate 
Governance Code for Listed Companies 2020; The Bank of Ghana 
Risk Management Directive 2021; the Securities and Exchange 
Regulations as well as the Continuing Listing Requirements 
of the Ghana Stock Exchange provide us with the regulatory 
framework for ensuring effective corporate governance, anti- 
money laundering and combating financing of terrorism.
Outlook for the year 2022
For the year 2022 we will continue to deepen our stakeholder 
relationships by liaising with our customers, our communities 
and our regulators. We will continue to work in close liaison 
with the Bank of Ghana to strengthen our Regulatory 
Framework. We will continue to manage and control all of our 
risks that is credit, operational, cybersecurity, environmental, 
compliance and reputational; by strengthening our risk 
culture, sense of responsibility and ethical behavior. We will 
aim to achieve the high commercial and financial ambitions; 
manage the convergence of our systems, operations, use-cases 
and processes to streamline our costs over time and deliver an 
equivalent standard in the Bank; we will keep the customer at 
the center of our concerns as bankers, while maintaining the 
principles of ingenuity and pragmatism in the solutions we 
offer them to increase their satisfaction. We will continue and 
intensify the refocusing of our activities around Environmental 
Social and Governance principles.Board Chair’s Statement cont’d
14
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCAcknowledgement
On behalf of the Board of Directors, I wish to express my sincere 
gratitude to all shareholders of Societe Generale Ghana PLC for 
your continued support and interest in the Bank. I also extend 
my appreciation to the Management and staff of our Bank for 
their untiring efforts during a very difficult year. My gratitude 
goes to my colleagues on the Board. I wish to express a heartfelt 
gratitude to our cherished customers for their unflinching 
support, loyalty and patronage. Together we are continuing to 
build Societe Generale Ghana PLC into the Preferred Banking 
Institution in Ghana.
Thank you for your attention.
MARGARET BOATENG SEKYERE,
BOARD CHAIRBoard Chair’s Statement cont’d
15
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCMANAGING DIRECTOR’S REVIEW
I am pleased to share with you the progress and achievement 
made during 2021 and to share with you a review of our 
operations and the performance of your Company for the year 
2021. 
2021 Operating Results
The global economy in the year 2021 was not spared of the 
protracted effects of one of the world’s worst Pandemic, 
Covid-19. The pandemic although eased in Ghana, still had an 
impact on the economic performance of the Bank.
Despite this challenge however, your bank took advantage of 
the opportunities presented in the market leading to a growth 
in profits of 19.5% in the year 2021. 
As a result of the efficient and robust risk management 
strategies, your bank was able to keep the growth of impairment 
of financial assets in check in the year under review. Loans and 
deposits saw a marginal decrease due to challenging operating 
environment. 
Review of operations for 2021 
Human resources management
In 2021, the Human Resources Management Function prioritized 
the improvement of staff engagement following the challenging
period presented by the pandemic in the previous year. Among 
the key issues were:
 y successful completion of 2021 salary negotiations
 y regular engagement between the HR Function and staff in 
various departments
 y completion of Request For Proposal(RFP) for Health 
Insurance Services Provider
 y on-site arrangements for COVID-19 vaccination of  staff
 y internship opportunities were arranged for young people 
living with special needs in the Head Office as part of the 
Diversity and Inclusion agenda of the Bank
 y engagement with Pension Fund managers to educate staff 
on the benefits of their pension schemes.
Corporate coverage department
The almost unremarkable performance for the year under 
review was partly on account of the conservative outlook on 
corporate credit in the midst of the sustained impact of the 
Covid- 19 on the Ghanaian economy. 
In 2021, the business demonstrated its strong support for 
the Small and Medium sized enterprises by setting a host of 
dedicated products. These products were geared at helping 
these businesses shorten their cash operating cycles and optimize their profitability by leveraging the desirable credit 
rating of their off take companies to provide cheaper financing.  
Owing to the fact that the financing is pre- approved, turnaround 
is faster compared to the conventional credit approval process. 
On the Global Transactional Banking front, we successfully 
launched our dedicated payment center. The payment 
center is made up of a team of highly trained and skilled 
junior relationship managers, whose mandate is to ensure 
that the transactional businesses of our customers are 
promptly attended to. This goal necessitated the structure 
of the assignment of a dedicated relationship manager to 
address all the transactional issues on a dedicated portfolio. 
The year 2021 witnessed a further strengthening of the 
collaboration and relationship between the Structured finance 
team based in Abidjan, the Development and Structured Export 
Finance Africa Team based in Paris and the local Ghanaian 
team. Though the Investment Banking business did not win 
any syndication mandate as arranger in the year under review, 
we succeeded in the approval of two Export Credit backed 
transactions. With our combined efforts, we built a strong 
pipeline of transactions for the year 2022. We will continue the 
strong collaboration to enable us position Societe Generale 
Ghana as a reputable global player in Investment Banking 
space on the Ghanaian Market. 
Corporate Coverage looks forward to a brighter 2022, anchored 
on a very strong and robust cash management, transactional 
and Investment banking offering; underpinned by technology 
and an agile global market.
Retail banking 
Following the challenges caused by the onset of the Covid 19 
pandemic in 2020, we began 2021 with a bit of sobriety, as the 
country entered into a second wave following the festivities.  The 
situation had a dampening effect on business and the general 
outlook for the year.  Nevertheless, we quickly refocused and 
reorganized to seek more opportunities within the space.  By 
capitalizing on all available resources, we explored areas which 
presented better opportunities of growth and to an appreciable 
extent we were able to grow both loans and deposit stocks for 
Retail and Professional and Small Business (PSB).  
16
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCManaging Director’s review cont’d
Though we faced stiff competition in an environment which 
required new ways and methods of working, we grew our 
loan book and a deposits.  PSB business had a good year on 
the back of our new product, partially cash-covered and Ariz 
backed working capital loan. Bankwide conservative stance 
on loan production informed the decision of the segment to 
moderately engage in deposit mobilization. We were therefore 
conservative in terms of drive to attract relatively expensive 
deposits.  This accounts for the relative low level of growth on 
deposits.  Earlier in the year, we still had to deal with the impact 
of Covid-19 on some key sectors such as aviation, hospitality 
and education.  However, by the second quarter we saw some 
easing in the business environment, which the bank also 
reacted to in terms of credit stance.  Most of the moratoriums 
put in place in 2020 were lifted by end of the second quarter.
In addition to the above results on the key business KPIs, Retail 
also worked on the following during the course of the year:
In addition to the above results on the key business KPIs, Retail 
also worked on the following during the course of the year:
1. Market collections strategy/branch:  With the opening of 
the branch in April, we officially launched the full Market 
Collection Hub, complete with the collection centre, YUP 
Office, Chinese Desk and Branch in September of 2021. The 
target customers are traders/businesses within the Makola 
market and its environs.
The model includes:
 y A Branch - This branch will function as a normal branch on 
its own.
 y Cash Collection Centre – focuses on the mobilization of 
deposits from customers on a daily basis.   
 y Retail Chinese Desk – special focus on onboarding new 
Chinese clients and ensuring the banking needs of Chinese 
customers within the vicinity are met.
 y Yup Centre - aims to promote the YUP brand within the 
Makola market and its environs through a number of 
outlined activities. 
2. Network development  – Opening of Derby Avenue Branch
 As part of the bank’s strategy to increase its presence in 
markets, Derby Avenue Branch was opened in April 2021 
to cater for the banking needs of our clients and prospects 
in this bustling commercial area. This branch forms part 
of the Market Collection Hub, but also stands alone as a 
full service branch like all others, capable of delivering 
banking services to the wide range of the bank customers.3. Allianz Life Bancasurrance Partnership:  We ended 
our Bancassurance partnership with Prudential Life, 
and signed a new partnership with Allianz Life in 2021.  
Following the signing, we initiated a project to fully 
onboard Allianz Life and introduce its products both 
to our staff and customers.  We successfully completed 
this exercise by June 2021, and officially launched the 
partnership thereafter.  We embarked on a massive training 
exercise of all our frontline teams, with the support of 
Allianz Life.  This was well done, and it ensured a seamless 
transition from Prudential Life to Allianz Life.  The results 
during the year are encouraging and we look forward to 
growing this line of business with the right level of support 
from our partner.
4. Periodic Review:  Following the completion of the 
KYC Remediation exercise by end of quarter one 2021, 
we immediately begun work on the Periodic Review 
exercise.  This was tasking exercise on Retail Business, 
and it stretched our resources particularly with respect to 
staffing capacity.  For our Privilege team, this was the main 
activity in 2021, which kept the team engaged throughout 
the year.  As this exercise has come to stay, we will continue 
to look for more effective ways of accomplishing this task 
without having too much of a negative effect on the core 
business. 
Treasury and Global Markets
SG Ghana’s financial market operation has gained more depth 
in 2021 with regards to product penetration, trading activities 
and market share. Core to the Treasury strategy is the prudent 
management of the Bank’s financial risks and prudential ratios. 
SG Ghana’s Treasury remains poised to provide appropriate 
hedges and solutions for its own balance sheet and that of its 
cherished customers.
Organization and projects
Organization and Projects continues to play a strong role 
in managing and coordinating various projects that seek 
to promote efficiency in banking operations and improve 
customer experience.
With customer service at forefront of our operations, the 
Bank equipped and upgraded the Contact Center to respond 
to client requests on a 24 hour basis and opened the Derby 
Avenue branch to improve accessibility and enhance deposit 
mobilization through our market cash collection offer/service. 
In addition, the Bank enhanced the  functionalities of the Mobile 
Banking Application (SG Connect), implemented an application 
to manage custodial services and initiated a project to upgrade 
the internet Banking  Platform for its corporate clients.
17
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCManaging Directors Review cont’d
On  the Digital strategy front, the Bank joined the interoperability 
platform offered by GHIPSS, enabling customers to process 
and receive transfers to and from their mobile wallets and 
bank accounts. The GHIPSS  ACH Near Real Time offer was also 
implemented, ensuring  close to real time value for transfers 
made by its clients. There were several initiatives launched 
to enhance the card business, resulting in the stabilization of 
the card production platform. The Automated Teller Machines 
of the bank have also been re configured to accept the GHIPSS 
GHLink EMV cards.   
Information Technology
Information Security was  key for your Bank in the year under 
review. The Bank obtained  the ISO/IEC 27001:2013 certification 
in May 2021 and the PCI-DSS certification in December 2021 to 
comply with those requirements in the Bank of Ghana Cyber 
and  Information Security Directive. This is an indication that 
Information Security Management System (ISMS) of SG Ghana is 
aligned with international information security best practices. 
It also demonstrates that the Bank has invested in the people, 
processes and technology to protect the organization’s data, 
and has had an independent experts assess the sufficiency of  
the data protection.   
SG Ghana completed the installation of backup links for all 
its branches in the year. This has greatly improved domestic 
network availability and further improved customer experience. 
In collaboration with the SG Group, an additional link (SD WAN) 
was installed to improve application connectivity experience 
on the international link. 
Operational Risk and Permanent Control
The Operational Risk and Permanent Control department, is 
an integral part of the internal control system of the Bank. It 
continues to play a critical role in deepening the risk culture 
among the staff.  In 2021, the department completed the 
deployment of normative controls as part of the Permanent 
Control Transformation program, which improved the 
Managerial Supervision activities of the Bank by making it 
more structured and secured.  Business Continuity Activities 
in 2021 focused on ensuring the continuity of the Bank’s 
business within the context of the COVID 19 pandemic. Crisis 
committee meetings were organized to implement various 
protocols aimed at reducing the spread of the virus such as the 
activation of User Recovery Sites to ensure social distancing. 
Business Impact Analysis was also performed on activities 
of the bank to identify vital and critical activities as well 
as IT applications for recovery in event of crisis or disaster.  
Permanent Control also ensured that risks that are inherent in 
daily banking operations were identified, analyzed, measured, 
monitored and managed within the Group’s risk appetite. In 
this regard, in-depth risk analysis was performed on all new 
products and services launched by the Bank in 2021, focusing 
on key areas of prevention, detection and timely response to minimize operational losses. The department continued with 
the monitoring of the Risk, Operational and Financial impacts 
of Outsourced Service Providers in the scope of their service 
provision and relation with the Bank. As a result, amendments 
to the existing agreements were drawn to include mandatory 
clauses such as Anti Bribery and Corruption, Business 
Continuity Plan, Sanctions & Embargo, IT clause, Anti-Money 
laundering and others to ensure that all risks are covered.
Risk Control Self-Assessment (RCSA), which identified all the 
risky activities of the Bank together with Risk Awareness and 
Sensitization Exercise formed the bedrock in strengthening 
the internal control systems of the Bank in 2021. Our enhanced 
compliance activities also focused on strong ethical and 
regulatory standards, giving SG Ghana an overall sound and 
solid image in risk management actions.
Marketing, Multi-Channel and Quality Review
The year under review saw a host of new synergies, innovations, 
partnerships, products and services. The department in 2021 
continued with its support for the business with research and 
development of new products, review and implementation 
of updated pricing for the Corporate and Retail Business. The 
department drove various advertising and communications 
campaigns to support business strategy. 
To improve the customer experience, a number of quality 
control measures were deployed including mystery shopping 
and voice of the customer surveys. The existence of a centralized 
complaints desk also ensured an efficient turnaround time 
for service recovery. Key events embarked on during the year 
include
1. Merger of Marketing and External Communication
2.  Launch of Innovation Hub ‘Innov8”:  A new user-friendly 
venue located at the bank’s Head Office, designed to help 
foster and facilitate the development and growth of ideas 
in collaboration with some of the most prominent players 
within the Ghanaian Innovation ecosystem.
3. Privilege Banking Art Exhibition: Client Art event to give 
customers an exclusive art gallery experience at the plush 
Kempinski Hotel in partnership with Gallery 1957. Gerald 
Chukwuma from Nigeria and our Afia Prempeh from 
Ghana’s works were on display. 
 
18
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCManaging Directors Review cont’d
Corporate social responsibility  
The Bank supported diverse community initiatives and 
projects in education, healthcare, environment, community 
development, art and culture with a total amount of 
GH¢442,883 as part of its Sponsorship, Patronage and Public 
Relations drive.
In the educational sector, sponsorships were provided for 
the launch of the French School yearbook and renewal of 
the Award for the Best graduating French student from the 
University of Ghana. In collaboration with the Inclusive Tech 
Group, a platinum sponsorship was provided for the disability 
inclusive hackathon program aimed at promoting the digital 
needs of Persons living With Disability (PWDs). For the Shelter 
for the abused in Osu, the Bank aided the facility by providing a 
means of transport to alleviate their transportation challenges.
On the environment and community, we sponsored a national 
conference organised to discuss the country roadmap for the 
sustainable development goals.  In community development, 
we undertook the provision of potable water for the Okoman 
Community in the Ga South Municipal Assembly. 
In healthcare, the Bank supported the annual breast cancer 
screening and awareness exercise by Komfo Anokye Teaching 
Hospital. In ecotourism, the Forestry Commission has been 
engaged on the possibility of constructing an Aviary for bird 
lovers within the sub region.   In Art and Culture, a competition 
was organised for young and enterprising Carvers as a way of 
promoting and developing talents.   These initiatives earned 
the Bank significant awards including the Top Brass Awards 
for Premier Ghana Business Finance Excellence and the 
Sustainable Social Investment Awards by Ian Matsu Global 
Services Limited and the Ministry of Environment.  
Compliance
The Compliance Department of Societe Generale Ghana has 
remained pivotal in ensuring that, despite the ever changing 
trends in the industry, the Bank, its stakeholders and staff  
are continually guided and focused in ensuring regulatory 
requirements, ethical standards and professional conduct are 
maintained at high standards. SG Ghana offers as its reputation 
and as one of its unique selling points, a culture which respects 
and offers continued adherence to local and international 
regulations. 
This assures our valued clients of the  security of their deposits 
and operations especially in these turbulent financial times. 
This also minimizes the risk of regulatory sanctions and 
guarantees the ease of business in the international markets, 
resulting in sustainability and growth of the investments of the 
bank’s shareholders, clients and partners. The Compliance Department continues to play an essential 
role in deepening the compliance culture in the Bank and 
ensuring adherence to internal and external regulations. The 
department will continue to focus on key compliance issues 
within the scope of financial crime and regulatory compliance 
topics to meet its mandate within the existing framework of the 
bank. 
The future 
Now our outlook for the future.  The target is to grow our 
credit and deposit market share by the end of 2022. We also 
plan to continue to grow our share of market activities i.e. FX, 
Derivatives, Fixed Income trading aggressively in 2022. Despite 
the challenges faced as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, I 
however remain deeply convinced that TOGETHER, we will 
achieve organic growth and development.  We shall Build 
Together with our clients; a better and sustainable future 
through responsible and innovative financial solutions. Our 
primary ambition is to deliver strong growth on market share, 
credits, deposits, flows and market activities and position 
ourselves among the major players of the banking sector. This 
ambition remains at the forefront of our strategy and is critical 
to enable the bank have the right setup to evolve in a highly 
competitive Ghanaian market with many Pan African and 
international banks. Finally, as a reminder on Covid -19 which 
is increasing in the country, we must stay away from events 
gathering large crowds as much as possible as it is one of the 
ways by which the covid–19 disease spreads easily. We should 
also avoid touching doors/communal surfaces. If unavoidable, 
please remember to wash or sanitize as frequently as possible. 
Also, please mask up before entry into any premises and at all 
times in communal places. Wash hands or use hand sanitisers 
as often as possible and observe the two (2) metre distancing 
rule.
Appreciation
I would like to thank the Board, Management, Staff and all 
stakeholders for efforts made in 2021 amidst the Covid 19 
pandemic. I would like to take this opportunity to express my 
gratitude to Executive Committee members for all the hard 
work undertaken during the year.  The year 2021 has been 
challenging due to Covid 19 given its impact on the industry, 
the Bank and personnel.    
Hakim Ouzzani 
MANAGING DIRECTOR
19
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCSOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC REPORT 
OF THE DIRECTORS 
The Directors in submitting to the shareholders the financial statements of the Bank for the year ended 31 December 2021 report 
as follows:-
  2021  2020
  GH¢   GH¢ 
 The Bank recorded net profit before taxation    281,966,699       221,630,035  
 From which is deducted taxation of     (97,637,066)  (67,421,120)
 
 Giving a net profit after taxation of     184,329,633       154,208,915  
 There was transfer to statutory reserves of    (46,082,408)  (38,552,229)
 Leaving a profit for the year after taxation and transfer to statutory reserves of     138,247,225       115,656,686  
 When added to the opening balance on the income surplus account as of 1 January of    149,907,074      66,161,749  
 From which is deducted final Dividend Paid of   (80,842,116)  (31,911,361)
 It leaves a closing balance on the Income Surplus account of     207,312,183       149,907,074 
Objective of the company and nature of business
Societe Generale Ghana PLC is a public limited liability 
company incorporated under the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 
992).   The company, which is a Bank is listed on the Ghana 
Stock Exchange and is registered with the Ghana Investment 
Promotion Centre.   The Company is licenced by the Bank of 
Ghana as a Universal Bank (Class 1 No 215) in Ghana under the 
Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking Institutions Act 2016 (Act 
930).
Holding company
The Societe Generale Group through its wholly owned 
investment subsidiary SG Financial Services Holding owns 
60.22% of the issued capital of the Company, thus making 
Societe Generale Ghana PLC a subsidiary of the Societe 
Generale Group.
Investments  
SSB Investments Limited, a company incorporated in Ghana to 
manage the equity investments of the Bank is a wholly owned 
subsidiary of the Company.  The nature of the business which 
the company is authorized to carry on are:-
 y to carry on the business of an investment company and 
for that purpose to acquire and hold either in the name 
of the company or in that of  any nominee, shares, stocks, 
debentures, bond notes and securities issues; 
 y to take over and manage all investments of the Bank; 
 y to do all such other things which may seem to the 
company’s directors to be incidental or conducive to the 
achievement of the objects.With change in ownership of the Company, the Bank in 2003 
indicated its intention to disinvest in SSBI in line with its policy 
and strategy, to liquidate SSBI and refocus on core business.  
The directors of SSBI at the time by a resolution dated 6 August 
2003 resolved that the entire portfolio of investments held by 
SSBI be disposed off.  Over time all the investments held by 
the company were sold off. The proceeds of the sale of the 
investments were credited to the Bank as SSBI is 100% owned 
by Societe Generale Ghana PLC.  SSBI has been inactive for a 
long time now since almost all of the investments which were 
held under it had been sold.
In order to comply with Section 73 (3) of the Banks and 
Specialized Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) 
which provides that a Bank or Specialized Deposit Taking 
institution shall not invest or hold investments in the share 
capital of a body corporate other than a subsidiary of that bank 
or specialized deposit taking institution that represents more 
than 5% interest in the body corporate.  
The Board of Directors of the Bank at a meeting held at Yaoundé 
in Cameroun on 1 December, 2017 notice of which had been 
duly given, authorized the transfer of its 10% shares in Advans 
Ghana Savings & Loans to SSBI(shareholding stands at 6.22% as 
at 31 December 2021).  The certificate for the transfer of Shares 
to SSBI was obtained in 2018. To achieve full convergence with 
Act 930, the Bank is currently working on operationalizing SSBI 
to comply with IFRS and Regulatory Reporting. 
The Bank has therefore put in place processes to make SSBI 
operational and functional in order to be able to use it as 
a vehicle to hold all its other investments that exceed the 
regulatory 5% threshold. 
20
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
On 4 November 2019, the re-registration process was completed 
at the Registrar Generals Department and SSBI was issued with a 
Registration Number CS241862019; a Tax Identification Number 
C003107913X, a Certificate of Incorporation and a Certificate to 
Commence Business.  An application is pending with the Bank 
of Ghana seeking their approval to fully operationalize SSBI.  
 
Stated capital
The Bank has complied with the minimum stated capital 
requirement for universal banking as directed by the Bank of 
Ghana
Changes in Board of Directors and Senior Management
Re-election of Directors     
In accordance with Section 60 (1) of the Constitution of the 
Bank, Mr Hakim Ouzzani; Mr Georges Wega and Mr Arnaud 
De Gaudemaris retire by rotation and being eligible; offer 
themselves for re-election.
Hakim Ouzzani: Managing Director.  He holds a Bachelor 
of Arts degree in Economics and a Master of Arts degree in 
Organisation Sociology from the Ecole Nationale Superieure d’ 
Administration et de Gestation National School of Management 
and Administration.  He also holds a Diploma in Banking and 
Finance from the Institute of Development Finance Tunis. 
Mr Ouzzani has a Diploma of Higher Education from the 
Arab Maghred Development Financing Institute. Before his 
appointment as Managing Director, he was a Senior Executive 
Regional Manager with Societe Generale International Banking 
Financial Services in charge of Cameroun, Chad, Congo 
Brazzaville, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana and Guinea Conakry. 
In 1998, he was the New Products Development Manager at 
the Union Bank.  He has worked as a Professor at the Ecole 
Superieure de Banque.   He also worked with the Central Bank 
of Algerie as a Senior Officer Loans & Refinancing Direction 
and Licencing & Regulatory Function. From 2000 to 2002, he 
managed the Corporate Branch of the Union Bank Brokerage. 
From 2012 to 2016, he was the CEO of Societe Generale Chad.
He also held various positions within Societe Generale as 
Group Deputy General Manager SG Algerie, Network and Sales 
Manager SG Algerie and Network Development Manager SG 
Algerie.  Mr Ouzzani was nominated to the Board of Directors 
of Societe Generale Ghana on 16 November 2016 with the Bank 
of Ghana granting approval to the said appointment on 23 
January 2017.
Georges K. T . Wega: Non Executive Director.  He holds 
an Engineering degree and a Master’s degree in Industrial 
Engineering from the University of Quebec, Canada. His career 
spans over 22 years’ having worked in several capacities in 
organizations around the world. He has acquired a long span 
of industrial and banking experience during his career. Mr 
Wega is the Deputy Head of International Retail Banking for 
Africa, the Mediterranean Basin & Overseas (Societe Generale). Among the places he has worked are Postes Canada (Ottawa), 
General Electric (Brussels and Amsterdam), Barclays Bank PLC 
in London and United Bank for Africa (UBA Nigeria). He also 
served as the Chief Executive Officer of UBA Cameroon for 4 
years. He then joined Societe Generale in 2014 as Deputy CEO 
of Societe Generale Cameroun, before being appointed Chief 
Executive Officer of Societe Generale Senegal in August 2016. 
He was nominated to the Board of Directors on 22 November 
2018 with Bank of Ghana granting approval on 16 August 2019.
Arnaud De Gaudemaris: Non Executive Director.  He holds 
an Engineering Degree from ISEP Paris.  He is the current 
Chief of Staff to the Head of Societe Generale for the AFMO 
Region managing about 14,000 staff. He is responsible for 
the organization of strategy preparation meetings, internal 
management meetings and also the African Region strategy.  
He was nominated to the Board of Directors on 28 November 
2018 with Bank of Ghana granting approval on 16 August 2019.
       
Election of directors
Appointment of  Independent Non-Executive Director
Juliana Asante: Independent Non-Executive Director.  She is 
a Chartered Accountant and Change Management Consultant. 
She has a proven record of success in the origination, 
development, implementation and improvement of financial 
accounting and risk management. She has also applied 
these skills in areas of operational processes and systems 
spanning almost three decades. She has held positions such 
as Senior Trainee Accountant/Auditor Deloitte and Touche 
Ghana, Finance Manager, Central Manchester and Manchester 
Children’s University NHS Trust (UK) and Senior Audit Manager, 
Deloitte Ghana. She is currently the Managing Director of 
Integritas Limited, Lead Consultant in the strengthening and 
transformation of Ashesi University’s Finance Function towards 
major investment by the International Finance Corporation 
(IFC). She is also a consultant for Arthur Energy Advisors in 
providing support for the Change Management Program and 
Improved Utility Performance for the Northern Electricity 
Distribution Company Limited.  She was nominated to the 
Board on  30 June  2021 with Bank of Ghana granting approval 
on 8 November 2021.
Appointment of Non-Executive Director
Yvon Puyou:  Non-Executive Director.   He holds a Master of 
Business Administration from EDHEC Sophia Antipolis France 
and a Master’s Degree in Computer Science from the Ecole 
Centrale de Marseille- Marseille, France. He held the position of 
Regional Head of Information Technology ,SG Singapore from 
1995 to 2000. From 2000 to 2003, he held the position as Senior 
Executive Director (Member of the Executive Committee) of 
SG Private Banking (Switzerland) S.A.Geneva, Switzerland  .  
Mr. Yvon Puyou was the Global Chief Information Officer at SG 
Private Banking, Paris France from 2003 to 2005.  He was the 
21
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Chief Operating Officer for Societe Generale Splitska Banka 
from 2015 to 2017.   He is currently the Chief Information 
Officer at Societe Generale African Mediterranean& Overseas. 
Mr. Yvon Puyou was nominated to the Board of Directors on 14 
September 2021 with Bank of Ghana granting approval for the 
appointment on 24 January 2022. 
Changes in Senior Management
y Mr Paul Agyenim Boateng Head, Permanent Control 
retired from the services of Societe Generale Ghana.  
y Mrs Lavana Tamattey was appointed Head Permanent 
Control   
All the said appointments were duly approved by the Bank of 
Ghana
Directors’ Interest
None of the Directors had a material interest in any contract of 
significance with the Bank during the year.
Interest Register
The Board of Directors duly approved a Conflict of Interest 
Policy.  The Directors  maintain an up-to-date register for 
documenting and managing conflict of interest situations in 
the Company.  During the year no interest was registered.
Building the Capacity of Directors
There were steps taken to build the capacity of the Directors 
to discharge their duties during the year. These include 
participation in training and capacity building sessions 
organised by the National Banking College on Corporate 
Governance. The dates for the training sessions were 10  
January 2022, 18 January 2022 and 21 January 2022.  The 
Directors were also trained by the Chief Compliance Officer on 
Anti-Money Laundering and Combatting Financing of Terrorism 
during the year.
Bonus Shares
There has been no proposal for the issue of bonus shares during 
the year under review. 
Policy on Environmental and Social Management Systems
The Bank has a Policy on Environmental and Social 
Management Systems, which was approved by the Board 
of Directors.  It also has an Environmental and Social 
Management Systems Charter, which was duly approved by 
the Board of Directors of the Bank.  Societe Generale Ghana, 
considers that the banking and financial sector is an essential contributor to  economic development. Fully aware of its role 
in assisting the economic sphere, Societe Generale Ghana is 
committed to conducting its activities in a responsible way. 
Taking into account the economic, environmental and social 
consequences and impacts of its activities is a major focus of 
the Bank’s sustainable development policy.
Based on continuous improvement, sustainable development 
as interpreted by Societe Generale Ghana draws on best 
practices of the Societe Generale Group and the other 
economic sectors. The objective of the Bank is to better 
understand, manage and improve its impacts on society and 
the environment, in conjunction with its stakeholders.
Societe Generale Ghana has established Environmental and 
Social Management Systems (ESMS) General Guidelines. The 
ESMS General Principles stem from the legal and regulatory 
framework applicable to the Bank’s activities. They are 
implemented through processes and procedures adapted to the 
different activities of the Bank. The Guidelines outline the key 
standards and parameters enabling a responsible engagement 
of Societe Generale Ghana in all its activities. They may evolve 
in time, according to legislative or regulatory evolutions and 
as a result of the discussions between the Bank and its various 
stakeholders. The scope of these guidelines apply to banking 
and financial services provided by Societe Generale Ghana.
Societe Generale Ghana complies with the Environmental and 
Social laws and regulations in force in Ghana and with the 
applicable international Environmental and Social conventions 
and agreements. Societe Generale Ghana being part of the 
Societe Generale Group, adopts and respects the values and 
principles enshrined in the following international conventions 
and agreements:
 y the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and associated 
covenants (i.e. International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights);
 y the main Conventions of the International Labour 
Organization; 
 y the UNESCO Convention concerning the Protection of the 
World Cultural and Natural Heritage;
 y the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises.
 y the UNEP Finance Initiative;
 y the UN Global Compact;
 y the Equator Principles.
Legal and regulatory obligations and adoption of the above 
standards and initiatives entail that Societe Generale Ghana 
shall not knowingly finance transactions linked to certain 
goods and services defined in its policy.
22
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Corporate Governance Directive by Bank of Ghana
The Corporate Governance Directive 2018 issued by the Bank of 
Ghana under the powers conferred by Sections 56 and 92 of the 
Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 
930) requires Regulated Financial Institutions to adopt sound 
corporate governance principles and best practices to enable 
them under take their licensed business in a sustainable manner; 
to promote the interest of depositors and other stakeholders 
by enhancing corporate performance and accountability of the 
Regulated Financial Institutions; and to promote and maintain 
public trust and confidence in Regulated Financial Institutions 
by prescribing sound corporate governance standards which 
are critical to the proper functioning of the banking sector and 
the economy as a whole.
Sound Corporate Governance Standards
The Board of Directors of the Bank have overall responsibility 
for the Company including approving and overseeing the 
implementation of the strategic objectives, risk strategy, 
corporate governance and corporate values. The Board is 
responsible for appointing and providing oversight of Senior 
Management. These responsibilities are set out in the formal 
Charter of the Board. The updated Board Charter was duly 
approved by members on 2 December 2021. The Board ensures 
that a well-structured and rigorous selection system is in place 
for the appointment of Key Management Personnel through 
the Recruitment Policy of the Bank and The Board validates the 
nominations of Key Management Personnel prior to submitting 
same to the Bank of Ghana for approval.
Annual certification
In compliance with Bank of Ghana’s Corporate Governance 
Directive for certification within 90 days, at the beginning of 
each financial year, the Board of Directors of the Company 
certify general compliance with the Directive. The Board further 
certifies that:
i. the Board has independently assessed and documented 
the corporate governance process of the Bank and has 
generally achieved its objectives;
 
ii. the Directors are aware of their responsibilities to the Bank 
as persons charged with governance.
 
iii. the Board further confirms that it shall report any material 
deficiencies and weaknesses that have been identified 
in the course of the year along with action plans and 
timetables for the corrective action by the Board to the 
Bank of Ghana.
 
iv. the Board of Directors have received training by the Ghana 
National Banking College on Governance and Directors 
Responsibilities for 2021.Business strategy
The Board approves and monitors the overall business strategy 
of the Bank taking into account long-term financial interest of 
the company, its exposure to risk and its ability to manage risk 
effectively. The Board approves and oversees the formulation 
and implementation of the:-
 y overall risk strategy, including its risk tolerance/appetite;
 
 y policies for risk, risk management and compliance, includ -
ing anti-money laundering and combating the financing of 
terrorism risk;
 
 y internal controls system;
 
 y corporate governance framework, principles and 
 corporate values including a code of conduct 
 
 y compensation system
Duty of care and loyalty
The members of the Board exercise a duty of care, duty of 
loyalty and other duties of Directors to the Company at all 
times which is stipulated in the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) 
and the Constitution  of the Company.
Corporate culture and values
The Board has established a corporate culture and values for the 
Company that promote and reinforces norms for responsible 
and ethical behaviour in terms of the Bank’s risk awareness, 
risk-taking and risk management.  The Company has in place a 
Code of Conduct; a Conflict of Interest Policy, Code of Conduct 
on Anti Bribery and Corruption Policy duly approved by the 
Board of Directors.
To promote sound corporate culture in the Company, the 
Board has taken the lead and established the tone at the top 
by setting and adhering to corporate values for itself, key 
management and employees that create expectations that 
business should be conducted in a legal and ethical manner 
at all times; and ensuring that appropriate steps are taken to 
communicate throughout the Company, the corporate values, 
professional standards it sets together with supporting policies 
and appropriate sanctions for unacceptable behaviours.
Related party transactions
The Board ensures that transactions with related parties 
including internal group transactions are reviewed to assess 
risk and are subject to appropriate restrictions by requiring 
that such transactions are conducted on non-preferential 
terms basis and applicable legislation and other requirements 
exposure limits for loans to related parties and staff.
23
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Plan for succession
The Board has duly approved a succession plan. The succession 
plan approved by the Board in 2020 was not renewed in the 
year 2021.  It will be reviewed in the year 2022. The succession 
plan focuses on developing human resources to enable the 
Company to retain a pool of qualified candidates who are ready 
to compete for key positions and areas when they become 
vacant to ensure effective continuity of the Bank.
Key management oversight
The Board provides oversight of Senior Management as part of 
the Company’s checks and balances and 
a. monitors and ensures the actions of Senior Management 
through reports from Management  consistent with the 
strategy and policies approved by the Board, including the 
risk tolerance appetite and risk culture;  
b. meets regularly with Senior Management through the 
Board sub committees;
c. questions and reviews critically explanations and 
information provided by senior management;
d. ensures that the knowledge and expertise of senior 
management remain appropriate given the nature of the 
business and the Bank’s risk profile;
e. oversees the implementation of appropriate governance 
framework for the Company;
f. ensures that appropriate succession plans are in place for 
senior management positions;
g. oversees the design and operation of the Company’s 
compensation system, monitor and reviews the system to 
ensure that it is aligned with the desired risk culture and 
risk appetite of the Company.
h. approves the overall internal control framework of the 
Company and monitor’s its effectiveness.
Separation of powers
There is a clear division of responsibilities at the top hierarchy 
of the Company.  The positions of the Board Chair and the 
Managing Director are separate. The two top positions of Board 
Chair and Managing Director in the company are not both  
occupied by foreigners.  The Chairman is a Ghanaian National 
and the Managing Director is a French National.  Further no 
two related persons occupy the positions of Board Chair and 
Managing Director of the Company. 
Independent Directors
The Board of Directors are in the process of ensuring and 
achieving convergence on the positions of Independent 
Directors.   The Board has three Independent Non-Executive Directors. The Board Chair, the Audit and Accounts Committee 
Chairman and the Risk Chair.  The final determination of the 
Independence of a Board of Director rests with the Bank of 
Ghana.  However, the Board of Directors will ensure that an 
Independent director shall be non-executive and shall not:-
a. hold cross directorship positions with another director on 
the Board of other institutions;
b. be a director on the Board of an institutional shareholder 
with significant equity interest in the Regulated Financial 
Institution;
c. have more than 5% equity interest directly or indirectly in 
the Company or in its related companies;
d. be employed in an executive position in the Company 
or its related company at least two (2) years prior to his 
appointment date;
e. have relatives employed by the Company or any of its  
related companies as Key Management Personnel in the 
last two (2) years;
f. have engaged in any transaction within the last two (2) 
years with the Company  on terms that are less favourable 
to the Company  than those normally offered to other 
persons; or
g. have served as a director in the Company  continuously for 
more than two (2) terms unless the director can affirm that 
his/her independence is not impaired;
h. be related to persons with significant shareholding 
in the Company or have any business or employment 
connections to a significant shareholder. 
Board qualifications and composition
Board members have the requisite qualification as Directors 
of a leading Financial Institution in Ghana  listed on the Ghana 
Stock Exchange.  The National Banking College have trained the 
Board of Directors on Corporate Governance.  The Board were 
also trained internally on Compliance, Anti Money Laundering, 
Combatting Financing of Terrorism and Anti Bribery and 
Corruption by the Chief Compliance Officer of the Bank.
The Board of Directors have a clear understanding of their 
role in corporate governance and are  able to exercise sound 
and objective judgment about the affairs of the Company. 
They possess, individually and collectively, appropriate 
experience, competencies and personal qualities, including 
professionalism and integrity.
The competencies of Boards are diverse to facilitate effective 
oversight of Management and shall cover a blend of Banking, 
24
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNO NAME  24 MAR 
202118 MAY
202130 JUN
202114 SEPT 
202127 SEPT
202119 OCT 
20212 DEC 
2021ATTENDANCE
1 Margaret Boateng Sekyere                                                    yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 100%
2 Hakim Ouzzani  yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 100%
3 Georges Wega yes yes yes yes yes yes no 86%
4 Agnes Tauty Giraldi yes yes yes yes yes no yes 86%
5 Arnaud De Gaudemaris yes no yes yes no yes yes 71%
6 Laurette Otchere yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 100%
7 Francis  Awua-Kyerematen yes yes yes yes no yes yes 86%
8  Fosuhene Acheampong yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 100%
9 Juliana Asante n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a  yes 100%
n/a  - Applicable to Directors  who were undergoing various stages of approval during the yearReport of the Directors cont’d
Law, Finance, Accounting, Economics, Business Administration, 
Financial Analysis, Risk Management, Strategic Planning and 
Corporate Governance.
The Board collectively have reasonable knowledge and 
understanding of local, regional and global economic market 
forces as well as legal and regulatory environment in which the 
Company operates.
Ghanaian nationals, ordinarily resident in Ghana, constitute at 
least 30% of the Board composition of the Company.
The Company does not have members serving on its Board that 
are Related Persons.
Board size and structure
As at 31 December 2021, the Board members were 9 including 
the Chairperson, the majority of which were non-executive and 
ordinarily resident in Ghana. There is an appropriate balance of 
power and authority on the Board between the executive and 
Non-Executive directors and no individual or group dominates 
the Board’s decision-making process.
Directors’ appointments and Managing Director tenure
The procedure for appointment of directors to the Board is 
formal and transparent and conforms to the Directive issued 
by the Bank of Ghana on fit and proper persons.  The Bank 
complies with the Bank of Ghana in respect of the tenure of the 
Managing Director of 12 years.
Appointment of key management personnel
The Bank ensures that nominations are submitted to the Bank 
of Ghana before it appoints a Key Management Personnel. With 
an enhanced due diligence Report on proposed nominees as 
Key Management Personnel. The Bank also conducts police 
criminal background checks; obtains references from previous 
employers and 2 other reputable persons; notifies the Central 
Bank about the recruitment of Key Management personnel and 
obtains approval.Alternate Director
The Bank does not currently have any alternate directors.
Board Chairperson
The Chair of the Board is an Independent Non-Executive 
Director and is ordinarily resident in Ghana. The Chair provides 
leadership to the Board and ensures that Board decisions are 
taken on a sound and well-informed basis. The Chair encourages 
and promotes critical discussion and ensures that dissenting 
views can be expressed and discussed within the decision-
making process.  The Chairperson encourages constructive 
relationship within the Board and between the Board and 
Management. The Chair  promotes checks and balances in the 
governance structure of the Bank. He/She generally does not 
serve as a Chairman on any of the Board sub-committees.  The 
Bank of Ghana approved the appointment of the Board Chair 
on 15 September 2020.
The Board Secretary
The Board Secretary serves as an interface between the Board 
and Management and supports  the Chairperson  in ensuring 
the smooth functioning of the Board. The Board Secretary 
advises the Board on matters relating to statutory duties of the 
directors under the law, disclosure obligations, and company 
law regulations as well as on matters of corporate governance 
requirements and effective Board processes.  The Board 
Secretary ensures that directors are provided with complete, 
adequate and timely information prior to Board meetings.
Board meetings
The Company holds a minimum of four Board meetings 
annually in February, April, July and December.  It also has one 
Annual General Meeting. In compliance with the Bank of Ghana’s 
Directive on Corporate Governance, the Board hereby discloses 
the total number of Board meetings and the attendance rate of 
each Director below which is above 50%:-
25
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
The Board discusses the business affairs of the Bank through 
reports submitted by management in writing as follows:-
y a summary of financial statements and performance 
reviews against the approved budget, business plan, peers 
and industry;
 y the extent to which the bank is exposed to various risks 
such as credit, liquidity, interest rate, foreign exchange, 
operational and other risks;
 y review of non-performing loans, related party transactions 
and credit concentration;
 y activities of the Bank in the financial market and in its 
“nostro” accounts;
 y effectiveness of internal control systems and human 
resource issues;
 y outstanding litigations and contingent liabilities;
 y compliance with Anti-Money Laundering/ Counter 
Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) policies, laws and 
regulations;
 y list of related party exposures and their classification.
Board sub-committees
The Board has in place a Risk Committee, an Audit and  
Accounts Committee, a Nomination and Compensation 
Committee, a Cyber and Information Security Committee and 
an Independent Directors Committee.
Review of risk management system 
Societe Generale Ghana has in place, an effective Risk 
Management Policy and generally complies with Bank of 
Ghana’s regulations in respect of Risk Management.  The Bank’s 
Risk Management Framework was implemented in line with the 
SG Group policies as well as Bank of Ghana’s Directives. Global 
risks coverage was adequate within the Bank. 
The Risk committee
Analyses on a periodical basis the organisation and functioning 
of the Bank’s risks departments. The Committee reviews 
the portfolio of credit and market risks to which the Bank is 
exposed. As regards counterparty risks, the Risk Committee 
shall  review the content of and changes to the portfolio per 
type of facility and debtor; the regulatory ratios and key 
indicators (consumption of own funds by major risks, risk 
worsening ratios, concentration risk per sector, cost of the 
risk, etc.), changes to the quality of commitments: sensitive, 
irregular, non-performing files,  compliance with the conditional 
authorizations issued by the Societe Generale; adequacy of the level of provision for the risks incurred, the efficiency of debt 
collection and reports to the Board of Directors on its work. 
Membership of the risk committee
The members of the Board Risk Committee shall comprise all 
categories of Directors and shall exclude the Chairperson of the 
Board. It should comprise at least 1 Independent Non-Executive 
Director, 4 Non-Executive Directors and 1 Executive Director. 
The Chairperson and members of the Sub Committee shall be 
appointed by the Board and shall serve for an initial term of 3 
years which may be extended by not more than 2 additional 
years.  The Committee members and the Chairperson shall 
serve until they are replaced, resign or their successors are duly 
nominated and elected by the Board.
The Board Risk Committee shall meet at least quarterly. 
Three (3) members of the Board Risk Committee shall constitute 
a quorum for the transaction of its business. A quorum shall be 
reached with the attendance of the members either in person 
or by telephone or video conference. 
The Chairperson of the Board Risk Committee shall be an 
Independent Non-Executive Director who is knowledgeable 
in risk management, finance, accounting and economics.  
The members of the Board Risk Committee shall comprise all 
categories of directors and shall exclude the Chairperson of 
the Board. In his/her absence, the remaining members present 
shall elect one of themselves to chair the meeting. 
The following officers of the Bank shall attend all meetings of the 
Board Risk Committee - Chief Risk Officer ; Chief Finance Officer; 
Chief Internal Auditor ;  Head of Credit or Corporate Banking ; 
Head of Business Promotion; Company Secretary. Members of 
the Board who are not members of the Sub-Committee may, at 
the request of the Chairman attend meetings. However, such 
Non-Committee members shall have no voting rights. The 
Committee may request members of management or other 
officers of the Bank to attend all or any part of any meeting or 
to provide relevant information in written form.
The Chairperson shall, in coordination with the Secretary to 
the Committee, be responsible for scheduling all meetings 
and providing a written agenda for each meeting.  Members 
of the Committee shall each be entitled to one (1) vote and a 
majority of votes shall decide a matter and in the event of a 
tie, the Chairperson shall have a casting vote. The Committee 
shall report to the full Board regularly following each meeting 
and make such recommendations to the Board, as it deems 
appropriate. 
26
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
2021 report from the risk committee 
Current Membership 
1. Mrs Juliana Asante     - Chair  
2. Mr Georges Wega   - Member
3. Mr Hakim Ouzzani  -Member
4. Mrs Agnes Tauty Giraldi  -Member
5. Mr Arnaud De Gaudemaris -Member
Meetings 2021
Four meetings were held in the year 2021 on 15 February 2021, 
29 June 2021, 13 September 2021 and 24 November 2021.
Mrs Juliana Asante is an Independent Non-Executive Director 
and Chairperson of the Risk Committee.  The Risk Committee 
has the following functions: It analyses on a periodical basis the 
organisation and functioning of the Bank’s risks departments; 
and reviews the portfolio of credit and market risks to which 
the Bank is exposed. As regards counterparty risks, the Risk 
Committee shall review the following, the content of and 
changes to the portfolio per type of facility and debtor; the 
regulatory ratios and key indicators,  changes to the quality 
of commitments: sensitive, irregular, non-performing files,  
compliance with the conditional authorizations issued by 
the Societe Generale; adequacy of the level of provision 
for the risks incurred, the efficiency of debt collection and 
reports to the Board of Directors on its work. The Committee 
reports its findings to the Board of Directors with the requisite 
recommendations. In attendance at Risk Committee meetings 
are the Deputy Managing Director, Chief Operating Officer, Chief 
Risk Officer, Head of Audit Department, Chief Finance Officer, 
General Manager Corporate Coverage, the Chief Compliance 
Officer and the Head of Permanent Control.  The Risk Committee 
operates under a Charter.
Summary of Issues Discussed
 y risk Indicators; 
 y the banks position on the market in comparison with peer 
banks; 
 y the global portfolio review ; 
 y market activities;  
 y irregular commitments monitoring; 
 y corporate credit exposure; 
 y retail credit exposure; 
 y operational risk and managerial supervision; 
 y risk appetite statement key indicators
Recommendations made to the Board for approval
 y credit policy for professional and small business y trading book policy 
 y valuation framework policy
 y market risk policy
 y risk apppetite framework
 y risk appetite statement
 y mortgage product policy
The Audit and Accounts Committee
The Audit and Accounts Committee of the Board is responsible 
for overseeing the financial reporting process including the 
establishment of accounting policies and practices; providing 
oversight of internal and external audit functions, the 
appointment, compensation and removal of auditors, reviewing 
and approving the audit scope and frequency, receiving key 
audit reports and ensuring that Senior Management is taking 
the necessary corrective actions in a timely manner to address 
control weaknesses, non-compliance with policies, laws and 
regulations and other problems identified by auditors as well 
as any other relevant matters referred to the committee by the 
Board and monitoring the Internal Control system in the Bank.   
The purpose of the Audit and Accounts Committee (whose 
authority is derived from the Board) is to assist the Board in 
fulfilling its oversight responsibilities.  This includes: 
 y keeps up-to-date with changes in the legal and regulatory 
environment affecting the work the committee monitors 
for proper execution, 
 y reviews and validates the accounts of the bank and the 
work of the External Auditors,
 y periodically gives an opinion of the organization and 
functioning of the Bank’s periodic and permanent internal 
control (including Risks related to Non Compliance), 
 y suggests to the Board of Directors the relevant adaptations, 
monitors the implementation of these measures and 
reports on their application to the Board of Directors,
 y validates, in consultation with the Groups relevant 
departments the audit plan of the Bank while making sure 
that the developmental method enables the areas of risk 
to be properly detected and covered, 
 y follows up the implementation of the Audit Plan and 
proposes adjustments if necessary,  
 y reviews the work done by Periodic and Permanent Control 
and reports to the Board of Directors on any anomalies 
and gives its opinion of the relevance of the corrective 
measures chosen by the Bank’s Management; monitors 
the implementation, according to the deadlines set, 
27
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
 for the critical periodic control recommendations as well 
as the solving of the critical points identified; Informs the 
Board of Directors of any discrepancies in the critical and 
priority corrective measures (failures exposing the entity 
to a high risk) 
 y reviews the procedures and the functioning of the anti-
money laundering and terrorism financing systems, and 
the compliance risk control, 
 y submits to the Board of Directors the measures likely to 
improve, where applicable, the security of operations, and 
monitors the implementation of the selected measures, 
 y is generally informed by Management of any event 
occurring in the operation of the Bank which is likely to 
adversely affect its control of risks. 
The list of issues to be addressed at the Audit and Accounts 
Committee meetings are formalized in the Audit and Accounts 
Committee File; Audit and Accounts Committee Appendix; 
Permanent Control activity; Internal Audit Report to the Audit 
and Accounts Committee  and discussed according to the 
Agenda.
Membership of the audit and accounts committee
The Sub-Committee shall consist solely of Non-Executive 
directors. Their composition shall not be less than 4 members 
who must be competent in accounting; auditing and finance.  
The Chairperson and members of the Sub-Committee shall be 
appointed by the Board and shall serve for an initial term of 3 
years which may be extended by not more than 2 additional 
years.  The Committee members and the Chairperson shall 
serve until they are replaced, resign or their successors are 
duly nominated and elected by the Board. The Sub-Committee 
shall meet at least three times each year and as often as may be 
deemed necessary or appropriate. 
Two (2) members of the Sub-Committee shall constitute a 
quorum for the transaction of its business. A quorum shall be 
reached with the attendance of the members either in person 
or by telephone or video conference.  The Chair of the Sub-
Committee shall be Independent and appointed by the Board 
and shall preside where he is present. In his/her absence, the 
remaining members present shall nominate another Non-
Executive member to chair the meeting.
The following Officers of the Bank shall attend all meetings 
of the Sub-Committee Managing Director; Deputy Managing 
Director; Chief  Operating Officer; Chief Compliance Officer; 
Chief Finance Officer; Head of Internal Audit; Head of Permanent 
Control; Company Secretary. 
Members of the Board who are not members of the Sub-
Committee may, at the request of the Chairman attend 
meetings. However, such Non-Committee members shall have 
no voting rights.  The Sub-Committee may request members of management or other officers of the Bank to attend all or 
any part of any meeting or to provide relevant information in 
written form.  
The Chairperson shall, in coordination with the Secretary to 
the Sub-Committee, be responsible for scheduling all meetings 
and providing a written agenda for each meeting. Members of 
the Sub-Committee shall each be entitled to one (1) vote and a 
majority of votes shall decide a matter and in the event of a tie, 
the Chairperson shall have a casting vote. 
The Sub-Committee shall report to the full Board regularly 
following each meeting and make such recommendations to 
the Board, as it deems appropriate.  The Committee has an 
oversight role, and in fulfilling that role, may rely on reviews 
and reports provided by management and the Committee’s 
advisors. In performing its oversight responsibilities, the 
Committee may, as and to the extent that it determines 
appropriate, review with management and the Board, and 
actively advise them regarding, the following matters: 
 y issues relating to the preparation and control of accounting 
and financial information, 
 y the independence of the statutory auditors, 
 y the effectiveness of the Internal Control,
 y measurement, supervision and control systems for risk 
related to accounting and financial processes;  
 y recommendations to the Board;
 y the effectiveness of the internal control and measurement 
systems and;
 y the supervision of internal control risks. 
2021 Report from the audit and accounts committee
Current membership
1. Mr Francis Awua-Kyerematen  - Chair
2. Mrs Juliana Asante    -  Member
3. Mr Arnaud De Gaudemaris  - Member
4. Mrs Laurette Otchere    - Member
5. Mr Fosuhene Acheampong  - Member
Meetings in 2021
Three meetings were held in the year 2021 on 21 April 2021, 30 
June 2021 and 24 November 2021.
Mr. Francis Awua-Kyerematen is an Independent Non-Executive 
Director and Chairperson of the Audit and Accounts Committee.  
This Committee reviews and makes recommendations to 
the Board on all aspects of the audit and financial reporting 
processes. In attendance at Audit and Accounts Committee 
meetings are the Managing Director,
28
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Deputy Managing Director, Chief Operating Officer, Chief 
Finanace Officer, Head, of Audit Department, Head of 
Permanent Control Department and where necessary, the 
Bank’s External Auditors.  
Summary of issues discussed
 y new template for reporting to the Audit and Accounts 
Committee; 
 y presentation of the Internal Control System in Societe 
Generale Ghana; 
 y operational risk and level 1 permanent control;
 y level 2 Permanent Control Risk Finance and Compliance;
 y periodic Control Activity; 
 y compliance & Anti Money Laundering & Combatting 
Financing of Terrorism; 
 y finance and taxation;
 y level 2 Control Finance;
 y summary of Statutory Auditors 
Summary of issues analysed
1. Internal Control Organization with the three lines of 
defence to control risks arising from the Banks Activities, 
Societe Generale Ghana Internal Control Instruction and 
SG Code Book A of the Societe Generale Group Code.  
 y The First Line of Defence- all staff, business lines, support 
functions, Central Departments and the Permanent 
Control Team. In charge of day-to-day risk management, 
it must know its risks, identify control needs and ensure 
that the necessary controls are implemented. Must have 
appropriate processes and controls in place to ensure 
that risks are identified, analysed, measured, monitored 
and managed within the Group’s risk appetite and that 
business activities comply with external and internal 
requirements. Implements Level 1 permanent controls in 
line with the norms, standards and procedures defined by 
the relevant second line of defence functions. 
 y The Second Line of Defence- Compliance, Risk and Finance.  
They ensure all risks are identified, assessed, analysed, 
measured, monitored, managed and properly reported by 
the business lines.   Performs second level controls to verify 
the adequacy performance and effectiveness of the first 
level permanent controls.  Defines norms, standards and 
procedures related to the operational risk management 
system and provides key indicators and analysis for 
overall risk monitoring. Challenges and supports the 
implementation of risk management measures by the 
business lines to ensure that the processes and controls 
put in place by the first line of defence are well designed 
and effective. Performs second-level controls to verify the 
adequacy, performance and effectiveness of first-level permanent control. 
 y The Third Line of Defence- Internal Audit. Evaluates 
the Group’s risk management, control and corporate 
governance processes using a systematic and methodical 
approach.  Evaluates the quality of risk management 
within the audited perimeter and the relevance and 
effectiveness of the permanent control system. Strictly 
independent of the business lines and Permanent Control 
and also in charge of the independent review of the first 
two lines of defence. 
2. Challenges encountered as a result of the Societe Generale 
Ghana PLC’s migration to a Delta V11 Solution,
3. The new combined and simplified template for Permanent 
Control, Level 2 Permanent Control, Periodic Control and 
Compliance,
4. The overall Risk Assessment of the Permanent Control 
System covering the Framework of the control system; 
Monitoring of Key Risk Management Processes; 
Supervision of Level 1 Controls; Supervision of Level 2 
Controls; Steering of Recommendations,
5. Permanent Control Activities & Risk Supervision 
comprising Operational Risk; Compliance Risk & Financial 
Security, Monitoring; Anti-Money Laundering; Major 
Legal Risks; Market Risks, Structural Risks,  Managerial 
Supervision Activity, IT Risk Management, Security of 
Staff & Equipment, New Products & Essential Outsourced 
Services, Twenty Largest Depositors, Follow Up of 
Accounts & Quality, and Business Continuity Planning and 
Crisis Management; Compliance, Anti Money Laundering  
& Combatting Financing of Terrorism,
6. Audit Plan Execution and Main Conclusions from Audit 
Missions,
7. Follow up of Audit Recommendations,
8. Recommendation for the approval of the Audit Charter,
9. Level 2 Permanent Control Plan Implementation and 
Missions undertaken for Risk and Compliance and Finance 
& Taxation,
10. The Internal Control System at the Bank; Overall 
Assessment of the Permanent Control System at the Bank; 
Operational Risks; Managerial Supervision; Business 
Continuity; Know Your Customer; IT Risks; Legal Risks; 
Level 2 Permanent Control; Finance and Taxation; the 
Establishment of the Financial Information and Accounts 
Review; Taxation Regulatory Reporting;  Missions on the 
Summary of Statutory Auditors; The Periodic Control 
System; the 2021 Audit Plan and realization rate and 
29
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC- succession plans: manager dashboard, departmental 
succession planning, key business issues and people 
implication; people and organization and 
 commitment,
 
-  the appointment of key management personnel, 
 
- compensation for senior management officers,
 packages needed to attract, retain and motivate 
 qualified and competent management staff. Report of the Directors cont’d
10. Action Plans were analysed on the global overview of 
Compliance Risks, Financial Security and Regulatory 
Compliance concerning Governance, Animations, 
Trainings and the Normative Framework; Monitoring & 
Control, KYC and AML; Embargoes and Sanctions; Clients 
Protection and Business Ethics.
Commitee recommendations for Board approval 
 y Societe Generale Ghana 2022 Audit Plan;
 y Societe Generale Ghana 2022 Level 2 Control Plan;
 y Societe Generale Ghana 2022 Compliance Training Plan;
 y Societe Generale Ghana 2022 Compliance Program;
The Nomination and compensation committee
The Nomination and Compensation Committee is a committee 
of the Board of Directors. The following are the elements 
that may come under its scope and authority.  The Bank’s 
general wage policy; the detailed salaries of  the Bank’s senior 
executives and key management personnel changes in social 
liabilities; administrators and company managers pay. The 
purpose of the Committee is to:-
 y ensure compliance with Bank of Ghana’s Corporate 
Governance Directive 2018;
 y ensure compliance with Bank of Ghana’s Fit and Proper 
Persons Directive July 2019; 
 y ensure compliance with Societe Generale Group Corporate 
Governance Principles Applicable to Group Entities 
Instruction No 014122.
 y assist the Board to accomplish its aim of ensuring that the 
Bank has a Board of competent and effective composition, 
size and commitment to discharge its responsibilities and 
duties in the best interest of the Bank and its shareholders.
 y to achieve best corporate practices by advising the 
Board in respect of succession plans, appointments and 
compensation packages for Management Officers of the 
Bank.
The Nomination & Compensation Committee does not 
however have authority to make decisions on these issues and 
has a purely advisory capacity; therefore it may only formulate 
opinions and recommendations to the Board of Directors.Membership of the committee 
The Committee shall be composed of not less than four (4) 
members of the Board who are suitably skilled and possess 
the relevant skills as required by the Sub Committee.  The 
Chairperson and members of the Sub Committee shall be 
appointed by the Board and shall serve for an initial term of 3 
years which may be extended by not more than 2 additional 
years. The Committee members and the Chairperson shall 
serve until they are replaced, resign or their successors are duly 
nominated and  elected by the Board. 
 y the committee shall identify and recommend to the Board 
nominees for membership.
 y the committee shall ensure the nominees have the qualities 
of integrity, honesty and accountability; objectivity and 
knowledge in business and financial matters and other 
relevant qualities and experience.
 y the committee shall regularly assess the Directors 
represented on the Board.
 y the committee shall effect Board Performance and 
appraisal covering all aspects of the Board structure and 
composition, responsibilities, processes and relationships 
as well as individual member’s competencies and their 
respective roles in the Board’s performance.  
 y the committee shall be consulted on issues relating to 
succession plans; appointments and compensation of 
Senior Management Officers of the Bank based on the 
recommendations of Management regarding in particular 
the following:-
The Committee shall consider and adopt its own agenda. 
The Committee will meet at least twice a year. The quorum 
for a Committee meeting is three (3) Committee members.  A 
Committee meeting shall be deemed to have taken place if any 
technological means allows any of its members to participate 
in discussions even if not all of them are physically present in 
the same place.  A member who is not physically present but 
participating by technological means is taken to be present.
30
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Minutes of the Committee, taken by the Company Secretary as 
and when adopted, shall be kept as official records.  Minutes 
of each Committee meeting must be included in the papers 
prepared for the next full Board meeting.   Minutes shall be 
distributed to all Committee Members after the Committee 
has adopted it and the Chairman has duly countersigned it. 
Minutes, agenda and supporting documentation are available 
to Directors upon request to the Company Secretary.  
The Committee Chair shall submit a report to the Board of 
Directors after each Committee meeting. The Committee 
may seek any information it considers necessary to fulfill 
its objectives and shall have access to Management by way 
of explanations, information, views and comments. The 
Nomination and Compensation Committee shall review its 
Charter when it considers necessary with the approval of the 
Board of Directors which shall be granted by a resolution. 
2021 Report from the nomination and compensation committee 
Current membership
1. Mrs Laurette Otchere   - Chair
2. Mr Georges Wega    -  Member
3. Mr Hakim Ouzzani   - Member
4. Mrs Margaret Sekyere   - Member
Meetings in 2021
Five meetings were held in the year 2021 on 16 February 2021, 
29 June 2021, 13 September 2021, 23 September 2021 and 24 
November 2021.
Summary of issues discussed
During the period under review, the Committee discussed and 
analysed the National Banking College Corporate Governance 
Training for the Board of Directors and the fees to be incurred 
by the Bank; Resignations and Nominations to the Board, 
Nominations of Key Management Personnel; Organisation 
Chart; Proposal in respect of Directors Fees and Allowances; the vacant positions at the Human Resources Department; 
Visit to the widow of the late Mr Kofi Ampim, the immediate 
past Board Chairman, to pay their respects.  The Committee 
also reviewed the Compliance Opinion of Mrs. Juliana Dansoa 
Asante, a proposed nominee for the position of an Independent 
Non-Executive Director; the Compliance Opinion of Mrs. 
Lavana Tamatey, a nominee for the position of Acting Head 
of Permanent Control; the Compliance Opinion of Mr Yvon 
Puyou a nominee for the position of Non-Executive Director; 
the nomination of Mr Francis Awua-Kyerematen as a member 
of the Cyber and Information Security Committee;   Medical 
Health Insurance for Staff; and the Securities and Exchange 
Commission, Corporate Governance Code; rate of compliance 
and Action Plan.
Recommendations made to the Board for approval  
 y Quarterly Corporate Organization Chart
 y External Board Compensation Survey
 y 2021 Board Self-Appraisal for all the Board of Directors.
 y Renewal of Medical Health Insurance for 2021/2022
 y Resignation of Mrs Martine Hitti from the Board
 y Nomination of Mrs Juliana Asante as an Independent Non-
Executive Director
 y Nomination of Mr Yvon Puyou as a Non-Executive Director
 y Nomination of Mrs Lavana Tamatey as the Head of 
Permanent Control
 y Appointment of Mr Francis Awua-Kyerematen as Chairman, 
Audit & Accounts Committee and a member of the Cyber & 
Information Security Committee 
 y Appointment of Mrs Juliana Asante as Chair Risk 
Committee; a member of the Audit & Accounts Committee 
and Committee of Independent Directors 
 y Update of the Board Charter in line with the SEC Corporate 
Governance Code 2020.
31
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCThe Cyber and information security committee
The Cyber and Information Security Committee is responsible 
for Security risk management strategy; and approving the 
Bank’s policies on cyber and information security, outsourcing, 
survivability, backup and recovery from cyber incidents and 
attacks, and disaster events.  The purpose of the Cyber and 
Information Security Sub-Committee of the Board is to assist 
the Board in fulfilling its oversight responsibilities of the Cyber 
and Information assets of the Bank. This includes: 
 y ensuring that adequate systems are in place to protect 
the Bank’s information and data assets, IT infrastructure, 
intellectual property as well as other third party 
confidential information in the possession of the Bank. 
 y ensure that effective internal controls and risk management 
practices are implemented to achieve security, reliability, 
availability, resiliency, and recoverability. 
 y respond to and manage any Cyber and Information 
Security threats and breaches.
Membership of the Committee
The Committee shall be composed of not less than three (3) 
members of the Board who are suitably skilled and possess 
the relevant skill as required by the Sub-Committee.  The 
Chairperson and members of the Sub-Committee shall be 
appointed by the Board and shall serve for an initial term of 3 
years which may be extended by not more than 2 additional 
years.  The Committee members and the Chairperson shall 
serve until they are replaced, resign or their successors are duly 
nominated and elected by the Board. 
The Sub-Committee shall meet at least twice each year and 
as often as may be deemed necessary or appropriate. Two (2) 
members of the Sub-Committee shall constitute a quorum 
for the transaction of its business. A quorum shall be reached 
with the attendance of the members either in person or by 
telephone or video conference. 
The Chairperson of the Sub-Committee shall be appointed by 
the Board and shall preside at all meetings. In his/her absence, 
the remaining members present shall nominate another Non-
Executive member to chair the meeting. 
The following Officers of the Bank shall attend all meetings 
of the Sub-Committee- Chief Operating Officer; Information 
Officer; Chief and Information Security Officer. Members of 
the Board who are not members of the Sub-Committee may, 
at the request of the Chairperson attend meetings. However, 
such Non-Committee members shall have no voting rights. 
The Sub-Committee may request members of management 
or other officers of the Bank to attend all or any part of any 
meeting or to provide relevant information in written form. The 
Chief Operating Officer has the role as Director of Cyber and Information Security (DCIS). 
The Chairperson shall, in coordination with the Secretary to 
the Sub-Committee, be responsible for scheduling all meetings 
and providing a written agenda for each meeting.  Members 
of the Sub-Committee shall each be entitled to one (1) vote, a 
majority of votes shall decide a matter, and in the event of a tie, 
the Chairperson shall have a casting vote. The Sub-Committee 
shall report to the full Board regularly following each meeting 
and make such recommendations to the Board as it deems 
appropriate.  
The Committee has an oversight role, and in fulfilling that role, 
may rely on reviews and reports provided by management 
and the Committee’s advisors. In performing its oversight 
responsibilities, the Committee may, as and to the extent 
that it determines appropriate, review with management and 
the Board, and actively advise them regarding, the following 
matters:
 y the implementation of information technology 
requirements of the Societe Generale Group and the 
requirements of the Bank of Ghana Cyber and Information 
Security Directive 2018; 
 y the effectiveness of the Bank’s Cyber and Information 
Security programs and its practices for identifying, 
assessing and mitigating cyber and information security 
risks across all business functions; 
 y the Bank’s controls to prevent, detect and respond to 
cyber-attacks or information or data breaches involving 
SG Ghana electronic information, intellectual property 
and data; 
 y management’s implementation of cybersecurity programs 
and risk policies and procedures and management’s 
actions to safeguard their effectiveness and the integrity of 
SG Ghana’s information technology  systems and facilities;
 y cyber crisis preparedness, incident response plans, and 
disaster recovery capabilities; 
 y reviewing reports and presentations received from 
management and the Committee’s advisors, including as 
appropriate the DCIS, CISO and other employees of the 
Bank ,external auditors, internal auditors, legal advisors  
and other external experts regarding the management of 
cyber and information security programs and risks; and 
 y other matters as the Committee Chair or other members 
of the Committee determine relevant to the Committee’s 
oversight of cybersecurity programs and risk assessment 
and management. Report of the Directors cont’d
32
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
2021 Report from the cyber and information security committee 
Current Membership
 y Mr Francis Awua-Kyerematen   -  Interim Chair
 y Mr Georges Wega     -  Member
 y Mr Hakim Ouzzani    - Member
Meetings in 2021
Two meetings were held in the year 2021 on 10 February 2021 
and 23 November 2021.
Summary of issues discussed
The implementation of the Bank of Ghana Cyber and 
Information Security Directive 2018.  These were categorized 
into 3 parts:
 y the ISO/IEC 27001 Certification  which establishes the 
Information Security Management System such as the 
policies, procedures, processes and technologies used to 
manage information security risks in the Bank 
 
 y the PCI-DSS Certification which ensures that Payment 
Card Data of Customers are managed in compliance with 
the internationally accepted Payment Card Data Security 
Standard
 
 y other Information Security requirement not covered by 
the ISO 27001 or PCI-DSS Standards such as in the areas of 
Electronic Banking, Recruitment and Termination of Staff, 
Contracts with Vendors and Suppliers, Physical Security, 
Applications and Software, Communication Networks
The Global implementation of the Cyber and Information 
Security Directive stands at 84.7%.  The key milestones 
achieved in 2021 were the:- 
 y Completion and formalization of all ISO and PCI-DSS 
related Documents and gaps
 y Completion of the Risk Assessment and Treatment 
Process.
 y ISO27001 Mock  Audits 
 y ISO27001 Certification Audits 
 y Completion of technical Implementation for the PCI-DSS 
 y PCI-DSS Audit.
 y Completion of all other remaining actions under BOG – 
End Dec 2021
The major achievements in 2021 were application for ISO27001 
certification with PECB completed.  ISO/IEC 27001:2013 
Certification achieved in May 2021 and PCI-DSS Certification 
Audit achieved in December 2021. Recommendations made to the Board of directors for approval 
 y Cyber and Information Security Report to be submitted to 
the Bank of Ghana 
 y Public Cloud Regulatory Compliance Policy
 y Use of Information Systems Policy
 y Access Control Policy
 y Information Security Policy
 y  Intellectual Property and Copyright Compliance Policy 
 y Information Security Context Requirement and Scope 
Policy
 y Information Security Incidents Management Policy
 y  Cryptographic policy
 y Technical Vulnerability Management Policy
 y Card Holder Data Security Policy
 y Data Retention and Disposal Policy
 y  Release and Deployment Management Policy
 y Change Management Policy
 y Network Security Policy
 y Software Policy
 y Secure Development Policy 
Committee of Independent Directors
The purpose of the Committee of Independent Directors shall 
be to determine the remuneration of Executive Directors. 
Membership of the Committee 
The Committee shall be composed of not less than two (2) 
members of the Board who are Independent Directors.   The 
Chairperson and members of the Sub Committee shall be 
appointed by the Board and shall serve for an initial term of 3 
years which may be extended by not more than 2 additional 
years.  The Committee members and the Chairperson shall 
serve until they are replaced, resign or their successors are duly 
nominated and elected by the Board. 
The Committee shall determine the emoluments of Executive 
Directors. The Committee shall consider and adopt its own 
agenda. The Committee shall meet at least once a year. 
The quorum for a Committee meeting is two (2) Committee 
members. A Committee meeting shall be deemed to have taken 
place if any technological means allows any of its members to 
participate in discussions even if not all of them are physically 
present in the same place.  A member who is not physically 
present but participating by technological means is taken to be 
present. 
33
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Minutes of the Committee, taken by the Company Secretary as 
and when adopted, shall be kept as official records.  Minutes 
of each Committee meeting must be included in the papers 
prepared for the next full Board meeting.   Minutes shall be 
distributed to all Committee Members after the Committee has 
adopted it and the Chair has duly countersigned it.  Minutes, 
agenda and supporting documentation are available to 
Directors upon request to the Company Secretary.  
The Committee Chair shall submit a report to the Board of 
Directors after each Committee meeting. The Committee 
may seek any information it considers necessary to fulfill its 
objectives and shall have access to Management by way of 
explanations, information, views and comments. 
2021 Report from the independent directors committee
Current membership
 y Mrs Margaret Sekyere     -  Interim Chair
 y Mr Francis Awua-Kyerematen   -  Member
 y Mrs Juliana Asante     - Member
 
 Meetings in 2021
One meeting was held in the year on 9 February 2021.Summary of issues discussed
The Terms of Reference were discussed.  This covered the 
Purpose; Membership, Scope; Agenda; Quorum; Minutes; 
Reporting to the Board and Access to Information and 
Independent Advice.  The Committee had convened pursuant 
to Section 72(d) of the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance 
Directive which provided that a committee of independent 
directors shall determine the remuneration of executive 
directors. Members approved and adopted the Terms of 
Reference.
Recommendations made to the Board of directors for 
approval  
No recommendations were made to the Board for approval.
Other engagements of directors
The Board is aware that to enable greater commitment to 
Board matters no director holds more than five (5) directorship 
positions at a time in both financial and non-financial 
companies (including off-shore engagements) subject to the 
restriction against concurrent directorships in banks under 
section 58(1)(e) of Act 930. Directors’ other engagements are 
disclosed below:
34
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Types and duties of outside board and management positions.
Name  Nationality Age Position  Appointed  Profession  & Directorships  
Margaret Sekyere Ghanaian 59 Independent 2019  y Accountant
Hakim Ouzzani French 53 Executive 2016  y Banker
 y SSB Investments Ltd
Laurette Korkor 
OtchereGhanaian 59 Non-Executive 2017  y Deputy Director General SSNIT
 y Total Oil Co. Ltd
 y Barrister at Law
 y Human Resource Expert 
Agnes Tauty Giraldi French 56 Non-Executive 2018  y Banker
 y SG Managing Director; Europe, 
Africa, Structured Trade         
Receivables Finance
Arnaud De 
GaudemarisFrench 45 Non-Executive 2019  y Banker
 y Director SG Benin
Francis
Awua-KyerematenGhanaian 53 Independent 2021  y Chartered Accountant
 y Managing Director,
 Winchmore Capital Ltd
 y Cenit Energy Limited
 y Electricity Company of Ghana
Georges Wega Cameroonian 52 Non-Executive 2019  y Banker
 y Director SG Benin
Fosuhene 
AcheampongGhanaian 58 Non-Executive 2020  y Chartered Accountant
 y Director Cedar Seal Company
Juliana Asante Ghanaian 55 Independent 2021  y Chartered Accountant
 y Director Integritas Limited
Yvon Puyou French 56 Non-Executive 2022  y Banker
 y Chief Information Officer 
at Societe Generale African 
Mediterranean & Overseas
35
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Board performance evaluation
The Board carries out self-assessment of its performance for 
individual Board members in order to review the effectiveness 
of its own governance practices and procedures The Board also 
assesses Anti-Money Laundering and Combatting Financing of 
Terrorism Training issues to determine where improvements 
may be needed and make any necessary changes.  The Board 
undertakes a formal and rigorous evaluation of its performance 
with external facilitation of the process every two (2) years.
Report on board evaluation
An in-house performance evaluation of the Board is conducted 
annually and a copy of the results submitted to the Bank of 
Ghana not later than 30 June of each year.
A separate in-house performance evaluation of the Board on 
AML/CFT issues shall be submitted to the Bank of Ghana and 
the Financial Intelligence Centre for June and December each 
year before the end of the quarter following the evaluation 
period.
A statement on the external evaluation of the Board is included 
in the annual report of the Bank with a  detailed copy of the 
report  submitted to the Bank of Ghana.  This will be undertaken 
once every two years.
Statement on the external board evaluation
Ernst and Young Advisory Services in 2020 conducted an 
external Board evaluation on the Board of Societe Generale 
Ghana to review the competence of the collective Board and 
of individual members to ensure the Board has the right mix of 
skills, capabilities and experience to deliver the right outcomes, 
meet its responsibilities, explore strategies for improvement 
and decide on actions to be taken.  The evaluation was done 
based on the quality of the Board and consists of:
 y ensuring the board is consisted of individuals of sufficient 
calibre to run the institution. 
 y strategy: ensuring that the board collectively defines the 
strategic direction and objectives for the firm and, that 
the strategic direction of the firm is effectively cascaded 
downwards. 
 y Board structure and composition:  ensuring that the 
board is composed of the right calibre of people (requisite 
knowledge and experience) to ensure effective and 
independent oversight while minimizing conflict of 
interest. 
 y Board operations:  ensuring that the board performs its 
oversight with respect to finance, strategy, risk and policy 
formulation.
 y Board risk management activities: ensuring the board 
performs active monitoring and strengthening of internal 
audit, internal control, compliance and risk management 
functions. 
 y relationship with stakeholders:  ensuring the board actively represents and engages with all stakeholders. 
 y transparency and disclosure: ensuring that the Board 
maintains transparency in dealing with its stakeholders and 
meeting its regulatory disclosure requirements. 
The evaluation of SG Ghana’s Board considered applicable 
regulatory requirements. The process comprised of review of 
relevant SG Ghana documents; online survey of 2018 and 2019 
Board members; one-on-one interviews with cross-section of 
Board members; benchmarking of the Board’s maturity against 
the External appraisers Board Maturity Framework.
The findings revealed that on Transparency and Disclosure 
the Board was advanced; The board was considered to be 
established in relation to the quality of the Board, its strategy, 
Operations, Risk Management, and Relations with Stakeholders. 
The board was however developing in terms of its Structure 
and composition. An action plan was put in place to implement 
the recommendation of the external Board appraisal and the 
implementation rate is 93.1%.  Implementation is ongoing to 
achieve 100% of the recommendations.
Ernst and Young Advisory Services has been engaged to 
conduct an External Board evaluation for the years 2020 and 
2021.  The exercise is expected to cover the provisions of 
the Bank of Ghana’s Corporate Governance Directive 2018 
for Banks, Savings and Loans Companies, Finance Houses 
and Financial Holding Companies and the Securities and 
Exchange Commission Corporate Governance Code 2020 (SEC/
CD/001/10/2020).  An assessment of the Board by EY will provide 
an opportunity for the Board to obtain on an independent 
opinion on its performance and promote sound corporate 
governance, transparency and shareholder confidence in 
line with its objectives.  EY’s review will include Assessment 
of the Board, its committees and its members.  The review 
will include the committees that existed as at year end.  Their 
assessment will include questionnaires and interview sessions 
with selected Directors.  This would be aimed at understanding 
the practice of governance in Societe Generale Ghana beyond 
existing documentation.
The Securities and Exchange Commission Ghana (“SEC”) 
Corporate Governance Code 2020
The SEC Ghana issued a Corporate Governance Code on 8 
October 2020. The Code applies to all companies whose 
securities are listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange (“GSE”).  
Societe Generale Ghana PLC, a company that is listed on the 
GSE, had to comply with the Code by October 2021.  With the 
implementation of the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance 
Directive 2018, the Bank is already compliant with most of the 
sections of the SEC Code.  The Board Charter was updated on 2 
December 2021. It will be  published on the Bank’s website.  The 
role and responsibilities of the Board as spelt out in the Code is  
described in the Board Charter. The Board appointments policy 
and remuneration policy shall also be in the Board Charter. 
36
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
The Board shall reflect the company’s broad shareholding 
structure.  The Board shall identify one independent Non-
Executive director who shall be responsible for relations with 
minority shareholders.
No person shall hold more than 3 directorships in any listed 
company at any one time.  All directors shall be required to 
submit themselves for re-election. The Board shall adopt a 
clear succession plan for its Chair and Chief Executive Officer 
and other senior executive officers.
Independent Non-Executive Directors shall be required to chair 
all Board Committees.  The Chairman of the Audit Committee 
shall be a Chartered Accountant.
The Board shall appoint a person with responsibility for 
relations with investors. This person shall have the resources 
necessary to fulfil his/her function. The investor relations 
officer may have other duties. The investor relations officer 
shall be the first point of contact between investors and the 
company. He or she shall be responsible for providing financial 
and non-financial information to investors, financial analysts 
and their representatives in a timely and accurate way. The 
investor relations officer shall also be responsible for reporting 
investor concerns to the Board and ensuring that the statutory 
provisions as well as the provisions stipulated in SEC Corporate 
Governance Code, regarding communications with investors 
and shareholders are met.
Compliance with the Securities & Exchange Commission Ghana 
Corporate Governance Code 
Societe Generale Ghana PLC, a Company that is listed on the 
Ghana Stock Exchange had to comply with the Code by 8 October 
2021.  With the implementation of the Bank of Ghana Corporate 
Governance Directive 2018, the Bank is already compliant with most 
of the sections of the SEC Corporate Governance Code.  However, a 
gap analysis has revealed that Societe Generale Ghana is compliant 
with 265 out of 298 actions.  As at 31 December 2021 the Bank is 
working on achieving compliance with 33 actions.  The Compliance 
rating is approximately 89% and the Bank is working on achieving 
100% convergence with the SEC Corporate Governance Code.
Conflicts of Interest
The board has in place a conflict of interest policy which includes ; 
 y the duty of the director to avoid possible activities that could 
create conflicts of interest;
 
 y a review or approval process for directors to follow before they 
engage in certain activity so as to ensure that such activity will 
not create a conflict of interest;
 y the duty of the director to disclose any matter that may result, 
or has already resulted in a conflict of interest;
 y the responsibility of the director to abstain from voting as 
prescribed  and on any matter where the director may have conflict of interest;
 
 y adequate procedures for transactions with related parties to 
be made on a non-preferential basis; and the way in which the 
Board will deal with any non-compliance with the policy.
The Conflict of Interest Policy was approved by the Board of 
Directors.  The Board maintains an up-to-date register for 
documenting and managing conflict of interest situations in 
the Company.
Group Structures
The Board of  SG Financial  Services holding company shall 
have the ultimate responsibility for the adequate corporate 
governance across the Group. The Board shall ensure that there 
are governance policies and mechanisms appropriate to the 
structure, business and risk of the Group and its entities.  The 
Board of Directors in addition to the Bank of Ghana Corporate 
Governance Directive of December 2018 utilizes the SG Group 
Corporate Governance Principles Instruction 01422 VI EN 
applicable to Group entities as at 2018 and the Societe Generale 
Code Book A on Governance and Organisational Principles  
published for all entities under the group in May 2020.
Senior Management Duties
Under the direction of the Board, Senior Management ensures: 
 y that the activities of the Banking Institution are consistent 
with the business strategy, risk tolerance/appetite and policies 
approved by the Board
 y that it establishes a management structure that promotes 
accountability and transparency
 y the implementation of  appropriate systems for managing risks 
both financial and non-financial  to which the Bank is exposed.
 y that they engage skilled and competent staff and provide 
training and development opportunities to sustain the 
delivery of short and long¬term business objectives, the risk 
management framework and protect the reputation of the 
Bank.
Risk Management and Internal Controls
The Board ensures that the Bank has effective internal controls 
systems and a risk management function including a Chief 
Risk Officer with sufficient authority, stature, independence, 
resources and access to the Board.
Risk management function
The Board has in place a risk management function responsible for:
 y identifying key risks to the Bank, 
 y assessing those risks and the Bank’s exposure to the identified 
risks; 
37
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
 y  monitoring the risk exposures and determining the 
corresponding capital needs on an on¬going basis;
 y  monitoring and assessing decisions to accept particular risks, 
risk mitigation measures and if the  risk decisions are in line 
with the Board approved risk tolerance/appetite and risk 
policy; 
 y  submitting risk management reports to Senior Management 
and the Board.
Chief risk officer
The Company has a Chief Risk Officer who is an independent 
Key Management Personnel and who has no involvement in the 
operations of the bank with distinct responsibility for the risk 
management function and the comprehensive risk management 
framework of the bank across the entire organization. The 
independence of the Chief Risk Officer is distinct from other 
executive functions and business line responsibilities. The 
Chief Risk Officer reports to the Board via the Risk Committee 
with a functional report line to the Managing Director.  He has 
unfettered reporting access to Board and its Risk committee. 
Interaction between the Board Risk Committee and the Chief 
Risk Officer is regular and comprehensively documented.
Internal controls
Internal controls within the Bank are designed to ensure that 
each key risk has a policy, process or other measure, as well as 
a control to ensure that such policy, process or other measure 
is being applied and works as intended. Internal controls help 
provide comfort that financial and management information 
is reliable, timely and complete and that the Bank is in 
compliance with its various obligations, including applicable 
laws and regulations.
Head internal audit
The Bank has a Head, Internal Audit who is an independent Key 
Management Personnel who has no involvement in the audited 
activities and business line responsibilities of the Bank.  The 
Head Internal Audit is competent to examine all areas in which 
the Bank operates and:
 y has the professional competence to collect and analyze 
financial information as well as evaluate audit evidence 
and to communicate with the stakeholders of the internal 
audit function; possess sufficient knowledge of auditing 
techniques and methodologies;
 y is a member of a relevant recognized professional body;
The Head of Internal Audit reports to the Board Sub-Committee 
on audit and has direct access to the Board and its audit 
committee. Interaction between the Board Audit Committee and the Internal Audit is regular and comprehensively 
documented.
Group-wide and Bank-wide Risk Management
Risks in the Bank are identified and monitored on an on-going 
group-wide and bank-wide basis, and the sophistication 
of the risk management and internal control infrastructure 
- including, in particular, a sufficiently robust information 
technology infrastructure keeps pace with developments.
Risk management in Subsidiary Banks
The Board and Senior Management of parent banks or financial 
holding companies conducts strategic, group-wide risk 
management and prescribe group risk policies. The Board and 
Senior Management of the Bank have appropriate input into the 
group-wide risk management policies and assessments of local 
risks. Adequate stress-testing of the subsidiary portfolios is 
done based on both the economic and operating environment 
of the subsidiary and on potential stress of the parent bank 
or Financial Holding Company. The results of stress tests and 
other risk management reports shall be communicated to the 
Board and Senior Management.
Internal and External Audit Functions
The Board and Senior Management effectively utilize the work 
conducted by the internal audit functions, external auditors 
and internal control functions. The Board recognizes and 
acknowledges that independent, competent and qualified 
internal and external auditors, as well as other internal control 
functions, are vital to the corporate governance process and 
engage the auditors to judge the effectiveness of the risk 
management function and the compliance function.
Compensation System  
Where share options are adopted as part of executive 
remuneration or compensation, it shall be tied to performance 
and subject to shareholders’ approval at an annual general 
meeting.  The Bank has disclosed in details, the number of 
shares held by the top 20 Shareholders. 
The Bank’s Corporate Structure
The Board and Senior Management understand the structure and 
the organization of the group and the Bank. The Board actively 
oversees the design and operation of the compensation system. 
The Board monitors and reviews the compensation system to 
ensure that it is effectively aligned to ensure
 y prudent risk taking; 
 y levels of remuneration are sufficient to attract, retain and
38
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC motivate executive officers of the bank and this is balanced 
against the interest of the bank in not paying excessive 
remuneration
 y where remuneration is tied to performance, it shall be 
designed in such a way as to prevent excessive risk taking;
Executive directors are not entitled to sitting allowances and 
directors’ fees;  Non-Executive directors’ remuneration be 
limited to directors’ fees, sitting allowances for Board and 
Committee meetings and are not performance related Disclosure and Transparency
The bank has submitted a list of its significant shareholders, 
directors and Key Management personnel as at 31 of December  
to the Bank of Ghana by 15 January of the following year. Below 
is the Corporate Structure of the Bank.Report of the Directors cont’d
39
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCCORPORATE STRUCTURE
Nomination & Compensation 
Committee
Board of Directors
Managing Director
Hakim OUZZANICyber and Information 
Security Committee
Audit & Accounts
Committee
Audit
Frank LAWOE
Chief Compliance Officer
Abena ASARE-MENAKO Independent Directors 
Committee
Executive Committee
Assets and Liabilities Committee Risk Committee
Chief Risk Officer
Kwame ANTERKYI
Executive Assistant
Anna MENSAH
Company Secretary
Angela N. BONSUAdviser to MD
(Vacant)
Purchasing
Samuel AKOTOHuman Resource Management
Dorcas QUAYE
Chief Finance Officer
Felix ADJAKU
Deputy Managing Director
Francois POUSSEChief Operating Officer
Bernice ALLOTEY
Organisation and Projects
Adwoa Asieduaa NTIRAKWACentral Back Office
Connor GWIRA
Cards Business
Michael CHARWAY
Logistics
Lawrence RIBEIRO
Security
Baba Mubarak AHMADUInformation Systems Technology
Abigail ALLOTEY
Cyber Information Security Officer 
Francis Amanor TEYECorporate Coverage
(Vacant)Treasury
Catherine JOHNSON
Structured Finance
(Vacant)
KYC
Celestine AMISON-ADDYRetail Business
Obed HOYAH
Marketing, Multi Channel & Quality 
Elikplim MUZZUSHAREHOLDERS
40
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Ethics and professionalism
The Bank has in place, a Code of Conduct which was duly 
approved by the Board of Directors.  The Code of Conduct 
has been made available to the Board of Directors and 
all Employees. The Code shall be reviewed regularly and 
when necessary. It contains practices necessary to maintain 
confidence in the integrity of the Bank and commit the Bank, 
its staff, management and the Board to the highest standards 
of professional behaviour, business conduct and sustainable 
banking practices.  It has been approved by the Board and 
signed off by employees that they understand the code and 
sanctions for breaching the policy.    
Cooling-off period
The Bank will respect the Cooling Off period under the Bank of 
Ghana Corporate Governance Directive  2018 which stipulates 
that former Bank of Ghana officers, directors or senior 
executives shall not be eligible for appointment as a director 
of the Bank until after a period of two (2) years following the 
expiration or termination of their contract of employment or 
service from the Bank of Ghana.  A practicing audit professional 
or partner who is rendering services or had rendered auditing 
services in the banking industry shall not be appointed as a 
director of the bank until one (1) year has elapsed since last 
engagement with any Bank by that person.
A code of ethics for all company employees
Societe Generale Ghana has a Code of Ethics for staff and this 
has been made available to all employees of the Bank.
Code of ethics for the Board and waivers to the ethics code
The Constitution of the Bank provides for ethics for the Board 
and provides that the Directors stand in a fiduciary relationship 
towards the Company in any transaction with it or on its behalf.  
A Director shall act all times in what he or she believes to be the 
best interests of the Company as a whole so as to preserve its 
assets, further its business, and promote the purposes for which 
it was formed, and in such manner as a faithful, diligent, careful 
and ordinarily skilful Director would act in the circumstances. 
In considering whether a particular transaction or course of 
action is in the best interests of the Company as a whole, a 
Director may have regard to the interests of the employees, as 
well as the members, of the Company, and, when appointed by, 
or as representative of, a special class of members, employees, 
or creditors may give special, but not exclusive, consideration 
to the interests of that class
Performance evaluation process
The Board has in place an evaluation process which covers 
the functions of the Board; Board meetings Management 
and procedures; Appointment, Induction, Training and 
Development; Succession and Removal; Board Structure; 
Information and Communication. An evaluation was 
undertaken during the Reporting Period.  Role and functions of the Board of Directors and committees 
of the Board
The main task of the Board of Directors is to make sure that 
the Bank’s operations comply with the relevant applicable 
regulations and with the strategy defined.  In this capacity, it 
must:
 y define and follow up the implementation of the Bank’s 
strategic orientations while making sure its business is 
developing in the proper conditions of security; 
 y check and approve management by relying on the work of 
the reporting committees from which it regularly receives 
information and to which it may assign tasks where 
necessary 
 y appoint, according to applicable local rules, the Bank’s 
Representatives who shall manage the Bank,
 y make sure the information given to the banking and market 
authorities and to shareholders is reliable. Therefore, it 
draws up the financial statements then presents them to 
the shareholders’ meeting for approval.
 y it must assess the way it operates annually. 
There are five reporting Committees responsible for supporting 
the Board of Directors, which are the Risk Committee; the 
Audit and Accounts Committee; and the Nomination and 
Compensation Committee; the Cyber and Information Security 
Committee and Independent Directors Committee.
Independence of the Board of Directors
The Bank is committed to achieving the highest standards 
of corporate governance, corporate responsibility and risk 
management when conducting its business. The Bank ensures 
that it conducts its business activities in accordance with all 
laws and regulations, which govern its business activities. The 
Board of Directors are responsible for ensuring that Societe 
Generale Ghana achieves and maintains a high standard of 
corporate governance and practices.
The Bank has a nine-member Board comprising one executive 
director; three Independent Directors and five non-executive 
directors. The Board consists of highly qualified individuals with 
diverse professional experiences:   The core role of the Board is 
to promote the success of the Bank by providing direction and 
supervision in the Bank’s affairs. Among other roles, the Board: 
 y provides leadership to the Bank within a framework of 
prudent and effective controls which enable risks to be 
assessed and managed;
 y provides input into the development of the long-term 
objectives and overall commercial strategy for the Bank 
41
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
and is responsible for the oversight of the Bank’s operations 
while evaluating and directing the implementation of the 
Bank’s controls and procedures;
 y provides oversight of the Bank’s strategic aims, ensuring 
that the necessary financial and human resources are 
in place for the Bank to meet its objectives, as well as 
reviewing management performance;
 y upholds the Bank’s values and standards and ensures that 
its obligations to its shareholders and other stakeholders 
are understood and met; and
 y ensures timely and accurate financial reporting to 
shareholders.
Remuneration and other benefits of Directors
Section 185(1) of the Companies Act ,2019 (Act 992) provides 
that the fees and other remuneration including remuneration 
payable to the directors in whatsoever capacity shall be 
determined from time to time by ordinary resolution of the 
company and not by any provisions in an agreement. The 
constitution of the Company provides that remuneration 
payable to Directors shall not be increased except pursuant 
to an ordinary resolution passed at a General Meeting, where 
notice of the proposed increase has been given in the Notice 
convening the meeting.  Collectively, the Directors at the Board 
meeting preceding the Annual General Meeting agree their fees 
and this is then placed before the Shareholders of the Bank 
through an ordinary resolution at the Annual General Meeting.  
Checks and balances mechanisms- Balancing the power of 
the CEO with the power of the Board.
The Constitution of the Company provides that the Board of 
Directors may from time to time appoint one of their body 
to the office of Managing Director. The person shall be the 
Chief Executive, for such period and on such terms as may be 
determined and, subject to the terms of any agreement entered 
into in any particular case, may revoke such appointment and 
such appointment shall be automatically determined if the 
holder of the office ceases from any cause to be a Director.
Subject to any directives of the Board on matters of general 
policy, the Managing Director shall be responsible for the 
directions of the day-to-day business of the Bank and for its 
administration. 
If the Managing Director is absent from Ghana or is otherwise 
incapacitated from performing duties of the office, the Board 
may authorise an employee of the Bank to exercise, for the time 
being, all the duties and powers of the Managing Director.
The Directors may entrust to and confer upon a Managing 
Director any of the powers exercisable by them upon such terms 
and with such restrictions as they think fit. Either collaterally 
with, or to the exclusion of, their own powers and subject to 
the terms of any agreement entered into in any particular case, may from time to time revoke or vary all or any of such powers.
Process for appointment of external auditors
Section 81 of the Banks and Specialized Deposit Taking 
Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) vests the shareholders of a bank 
with the power to appoint the external auditors at an Annual 
General Meeting and be approved by the Bank of Ghana in the 
manner and on the terms as may be described.  
Process for interaction with external auditors
The Board of Directors on an annual basis invite the external 
auditors of the company to a meeting for an Independent 
Auditors Report on the Audited Financial Statements of the 
Company. The external auditors of the company explain to 
the Board the completion of the audit on the company which 
is undertaken in accordance with international standards.  
They usually state that the audit is conducted to enable the 
external auditors form an opinion on the financial statements 
that have been prepared by management with oversight of the 
Board of Directors.  They further explain to the Board that the 
audit of the financial statements does not relieve management 
or the Board of their responsibilities.  The auditors draw the 
Board’s attention to any matters identified during the audit 
of the financial statements of the company.  The auditors 
obtain Management’s Responses to any matter(s) and draw 
the Board’s attention to any areas of concern. At the meeting 
the External Auditors Report on the Financial Statements, 
the Directors Responsibility for the Financial Statements, the 
Auditors Responsibility, Opinion and Report on other legal and 
regulatory requirements.  
  
Duration of current auditors
Messrs Ernst & Young were appointed as Auditors of Societe 
Generale Ghana PLC on 31 March 2017 during the Bank’s 
Annual General Meeting. Thus, they are in their sixth year of 
providing auditing services to the bank.  They were appointed 
in accordance with Section 139(5) of the Companies Act, 2019 
(Act 992) and Section 44 of the Constitution of the Bank. In 
line with the mandatory rotation of auditors as directed by the 
Bank of Ghana, they will cease to be auditors of the Bank at the 
close of the Annual General Meeting.
Auditors’ involvement in non-audit work and the fees paid 
to the auditors
Apart from the audit assignment, Ernst and Young Chartered 
Accountants, were not engaged by the bank to undertake any 
non-audit work during the year.
Auditors remuneration
The auditor’s remuneration is determned in accordance with 
Section 140 of the Comapnies Act, 2019 (Act 992).
Stated capital of the bank
The stated capital of the Bank is GH¢ 404,245,427.
42
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Board Chair  
(Margaret Boateng  Sekyere)  
ACCRA  
25 February 2022   
 Managing Director  
(Hakim Ouzzani)  
ACCRA  
25 February 2022    
 By order of the BoardSubstantial shareholders
Details of the Bank’s twenty largest shareholders are disclosed 
in note 44 to the financial statements.
Corporate Governance
Societe Generale Ghana PLC respects the standards of 
good corporate governance, which include transparency, 
accountability and rights of all its stakeholders. 
Compliance with securities and exchange commission 
regulations
The Bank has complied with the regulations of the Securities 
and Exchange Commission (L.I. 1728 Regulation 61) and has 
submitted to the Commission as requested, two (2) reports of 
the Audit and Accounts Committee for the year 2021. The Audit 
Committee held three meetings during the year under review.  
In fulfilment of the Securities and Exchange Commission 
requirements, we present a summary of the reports so 
submitted: 
 y Report on Periodic Control, Permanent Control; 
Compliance; Credit Risk, Operational Risk, and Market Risk Activities
 y Report on Structural Risks and Statutory Ratios
 y Report on Bank of Ghana’s Prudential Ratios
 y Report on an overview of the Audit Department and its 
functions
 y Report on Compliance Monitoring, Anti Money Laundering 
and Permanent Supervision ensuring continuous 
monitoring of operational activities.
 y Report on Counterparty Risks
 y Report on Changes in Organisational Structure
 y Report on Business Continuity Plan
 y Audit Reports on Branches submitted.
 y Report on Managing Conflict of Interest within the Bank
The External Auditors submitted their audit plan for the year 
and concluded that the audit approach will be risk based and 
control focused and that the audit will be in accordance with 
International Standards on Auditing. 
43
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCSTATEMENT OF DIRECTORS’ 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
The Directors are responsible for preparing financial statements 
for each financial period, which give a true and fair view of the 
state of affairs of the bank at the end of the period and of the 
profit or loss of the bank for that period. In preparing those 
financial statements, the Directors are required to: 
 y Select suitable accounting policies and then apply them 
consistently.
 y Make judgments and estimates that are reasonable and 
prudent.
 y State whether applicable accounting standards have been 
followed subject to any material departures, disclosed 
and explained in the financial statements.
 y Prepare the financial statements on a going concern basis 
unless it is inappropriate to presume that the company 
will continue in business.The Directors are responsible for ensuring that the company 
keeps accounting records which disclose with reasonable 
accuracy the financial position of the company and which 
enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply 
with the provision of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the 
Bank and Specialized Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 
930) and International Financial Reporting Standards.  They are 
responsible for safeguarding the assets of the bank and hence 
for taking steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and 
other irregularities.   
The above statement should be read in conjunction with the 
statement of the auditors’ responsibilities on page 47, which 
is made with a view to distinguishing, for shareholders, the 
respective responsibilities of the Directors and the Auditors in 
relation to the financial statements.
44
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCINDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT
TO THE SHAREHOLDERS OF SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC
Opinion
We have audited the financial statements of Societe Generale 
Ghana PLC (the Bank) set out on pages 50 to 114, which 
comprise the statement of financial position as at 31 December 
2021, the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive 
income, the statement of changes in equity and the statement 
of cash flows for the year then ended, and notes to the financial 
statements, including a summary of significant accounting 
policies.
In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in all 
material respects, the financial position of the Bank as at 31 
December 2021, and its financial performance and cash flows 
for the year then ended in accordance with International 
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and in the manner 
required by the provisions of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) 
and the Banks and Specialized Deposit -Taking Institutions Act, 
2016 (Act 930).
Basis for opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International 
Standards on Auditing (ISAs). Our responsibilities under those 
standards are further described in the Auditors’ Responsibilities 
for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of our 
report. We are independent of the Bank in accordance with 
the International Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants 
(including International Independence Standards) (IESBA Code) together with the ethical requirements that are relevant 
to our audit of the financial statements of Societe Generale 
Ghana PLC in Ghana, and we have fulfilled our other ethical 
responsibilities in accordance with these requirements and 
the IESBA Code. We believe that the audit evidence we have 
obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our 
opinion.
Key audit matters
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional 
judgement, were significant in our audit of the financial 
statements of the current period. These matters were 
addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements 
as a whole, and in forming our opinion thereon, and we do not 
provide a separate opinion on these matters. For each matter 
below, our description of how our audit addressed the matter 
is provided in that context.
We have fulfilled the responsibilities described in the Auditors’ 
Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements 
section of our report, including in relation to these matters. 
Accordingly, our audit included the performance of procedures 
designed to respond to our assessment of the risks of material 
misstatement of the financial statements. The results of our 
audit procedures, including the procedures performed to 
address the matters below, provide the basis for our audit 
opinion on the accompanying financial statements.Ernst & Young Chartered Accountants
60 Rangoon Lane, Cantonments
Accra, Ghana
P . O. Box KA 16009,
Airport, Accra, GhanaTel: +233 302 779868 / 4275 / 9223 / 2091
Fax: +233 302 778894 / 2934
ey.com
45
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC    Key audit matter    How our audit addressed the key audit matter
IFRS 9 introduced a forward-looking Expected Credit Loss 
(ECL) model.
The ECL model is to reflect the general pattern of 
deterioration or improvement in the credit quality of 
financial instruments. 
The amount of ECL’s recognized as a loss allowance or 
provision depends on the extent of credit deterioration 
since the initial recognition and recognition of 
impairment could be done on a 12-month expected credit 
losses or Lifetime expected credit losses. Impairment 
computations under IFRS 9 therefore involves the use of 
models that takes into account:
 y The probability-weighted outcome.
 y Reasonable and supportable information that is 
available without undue cost or Loan loss provision 
is a key area of judgement for management. 
Significant judgements in the determination of the 
Bank’s Expected Credit Loss includes:
 y Use of assumptions in determining ECL modelling 
parameters.
 y portfolio segmentation for ECL computation.
 y Determination of a significant increase credit risk 
and 
 y Determination of associations between 
macroeconomic scenarios.
The use of different models and assumptions can 
significantly affect the level of allowance for expected 
credit losses on loans and advances to customers. Due 
to the significance of such loans which account for about 
45.97% of total assets of the bank, and the significant 
use of judgements, the assessment of the allowance for 
expected credit losses is a key audit matter.
The information on expected credit losses on loans and 
advances to customers is provided in Note 20e ‘’Analysis 
of impairment allowances’’ of the financial statements.We have obtained an understanding of the Bank’s 
implementation process of IFRS 9, including 
understanding of the changes to the Bank’s IT systems, 
processes and controls. Additionally, we obtained an 
understanding of the credit risk modelling methodology.
We validated and tested the ECL model of the Bank by 
assessing the data integrity and the internal controls 
around the model.
We have also performed, among others, the following 
substantive audit procedures:  
 y Reviewed the accounting policies and framework 
methodology developed by the Bank in order to 
assess its compliance with IFRS 9; 
 y Verified sampled underlying contracts of financial 
assets to determine the appropriateness of 
management’s classification and measurement of 
these instruments in the ECL model.
 y Reviewed and tested the methodology developed 
to calculate loan loss provision under IFRS 9, 
concentrating on aspects such as factors for 
determining a ‘significant increase in credit risk’ , 
staging of loans, testing specific models related to 
Probability of Default (PD), Loss Given Default (LGD), 
Exposure at Default (EAD).   
 y Tested the accuracy and completeness of data used 
in modelling the risk parameter, Recalculating the 
ECL, 
 y Reviewed forward looking information/multiple 
economic scenario elements.  
 y For stage 3 exposures, we tested the reasonableness 
of the assumptions underlying the impairment 
identification and quantification including forecasts 
of future cash flows, valuation of underlying 
collateral, estimated period of realisation for 
collaterals, etc.
 y We have also analysed information relating to the 
allowance for expected credit losses on loans and 
advances to customers disclosed in the notes to the 
financial statements of the Bank.Independent Auditor’s Report cont’d
Allowance for expected credit losses on loans and advances to customers
46
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCOther information
The Directors are responsible for the other information. The 
other information comprises corporate information (Directors, 
Officials and Registered Office), report of the Directors and 
statement of directors’ responsibilities. Other information does 
not include the financial statements and our Auditor’s report 
thereon. Our opinion on the financial statements does not 
cover the other information and we do not express an audit 
opinion or any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements, our 
responsibility is to read the other information and, in doing 
so, consider whether the other information is materially 
inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge 
obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to be materially 
misstated. If, based on the work we have performed on the 
other information obtained prior to the date of this Auditor’s 
report, we conclude that there is a material misstatement of 
this other information, we are required to report that fact. We 
have nothing to report in this regard.
Responsibilities of the Directors for the financial statements
The Directors are responsible for the preparation and fair 
presentation of the financial statements in accordance 
with International Financial Reporting Standards and the 
requirements of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and 
the Banks and Specialized Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 
2016 (Act 930) and for such internal control as the Directors 
determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial 
statements that are free from material misstatement, whether 
due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements, the Directors are 
responsible for assessing the Bank’s ability to continue as a 
going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters relating to 
going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting 
unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Bank or to 
cease operations, or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the financial 
statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about 
whether the financial statements as a whole are free from 
material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to 
issue an Auditor’s report that includes our opinion. Reasonable 
assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee 
that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs will always 
detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements 
can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, 
individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be 
expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
As part of an audit in accordance with ISAs, we exercise 
professional judgement and maintain professional scepticism 
throughout the audit. We also:
 y Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of 
the financial statements, whether due to fraud or error, 
design and perform audit procedures responsive to those 
risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and 
appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk 
of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from 
fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud 
may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, 
misrepresentations, or the override of internal control. 
 y Obtain an understanding of internal controls relevant 
to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are 
appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose 
of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Bank’s 
internal control.
 y Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used 
and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and 
related disclosures made by the Directors.
 y Conclude on the appropriateness of the Directors’ use of the 
going concern basis of accounting and based on the audit 
evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists 
related to events or conditions that may cast significant 
doubt on the Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern. 
If we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are 
required to draw attention in our Auditor’s report to the 
related disclosures in the financial statements or, if such 
disclosures are inadequate, to modify our opinion. Our 
conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up 
to the date of our auditor’s report. However, future events 
or conditions may cause the Bank to cease to continue as 
a going concern.
 y Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content 
of the financial statements, including the disclosures, and 
whether the financial statements represent the underlying 
transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair 
presentation.
We communicate with the Directors regarding, among other 
matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and 
significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies 
in internal controls that we identify during our audit.
We also provide the Directors with a statement that we have 
complied with relevant ethical requirements regarding Independent Auditor’s Report cont’d
47
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCIndependent Auditor’s Report cont’d
independence, and to communicate with them all relationships 
and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on 
our independence, and where applicable, actions taken to 
eliminate threats or related safeguards applied.
From the matters communicated with the Directors, we 
determine those matters that were of most significance in the 
audit of the financial statements of the current period and are 
therefore the key audit matters. We describe these matters 
in our Auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes 
public disclosure about the matter or when, in extremely rare 
circumstances, we determine that a matter should not be  
communicated in our report because the adverse consequences 
of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the 
public interest benefits of such communication.
Report on other legal requirements
The Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) requires that in carrying out 
our audit we consider and report on the following matters.  We 
confirm that:
 y We have obtained all the information and explanations 
which to the best of our knowledge and belief were 
necessary for the purposes of our audit;
 y In our opinion, proper books of account have been kept by 
the Bank, so far as appears from our examination of those 
books; 
 y Proper returns adequate for the purpose of our audit have 
been received from branches not visited by us;
 y The statement of financial position and the statement of 
comprehensive income (statement of profit or loss and 
other comprehensive income) are in agreement with the 
accounting records and returns.
 y In our opinion, to the best of our information and 
according to the explanations given to us, the accounts 
give the information required under the Act, in the manner 
so required and give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Bank at the end of the financial year and of 
the profit or loss for the financial year then ended.
 y We are independent of the Bank pursuant to Section 143 
of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992).
The Banks and Specialized Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 
2016 (Act 930) under Section 85(2) requires that we report on 
certain matters. Accordingly, we state that:
 y The accounts give a true and fair view of the statement 
of affairs of the Bank and the results of operations for the 
year under review;
 y We were able to obtain all the information and explanations 
required for the efficient performance of our duties;
 y The transactions of the bank are generally within the 
powers of the Bank;
 y The Bank has generally complied with the provisions of 
the Banks and Specialized Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 
2016 (Act 930).
 y The Bank has generally complied with the provisions of 
the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2008 (Act 749), the Anti-
Terrorism Act, 2008 (Act 762) and regulations made under 
these enactments;
The Engagement Partner on the audit resulting in this 
independent Auditor’s report is Pamela Des Bordes 
(ICAG/P/1329).
 
Ernst & Young (ICAG/F/2022/126)  
Chartered Accountants, Accra, Ghana
25 February 2022
48
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCFINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS 
2,449 2,790 3,431 4,444 5,115 5,437 
 -  1,000  2,000  3,000  4,000  5,000  6,000201620172018201920202021Total Assets GH 
942 1,410 1,665 2,643 2,563 2,504 
 -  500  1,000  1,500  2,000  2,500  3,000201620172018201920202021Net Loans GH 
611 308 767 141 604 1,614 
 -  200  400  600  800  1,000  1,200  1,400  1,600  1,800201620172018201920202021Investments GH 
62%19%11%8%
D ep os its Shareholders Funds Borrowings Other Liabilities
1,793 1,994 2,165 3,347 3,485 3,393 
 -  500  1,000  1,500  2,000  2,500  3,000  3,500  4,000201620172018201920202021Deposits GH 
333 519 702 802 926 1,029 
 -  200  400  600  800  1,000  1,200201620172018201920202021Shareholders Funds GH 
63%
8%29%
Net Interest Income Commission and fees Other I ncome
64 91 62 129 154 184 
 -  50  100  150  200201620172018201920202021Profit After Tax GH 
328 386 402 509 549636
 -  100  200  300  400  500  600  700201620172018201920202021Net Banking income GH 46%
30%18%7%
Loans Investments Cas h a nd s hort te rm funds Other A ssets¢’M
¢’M6%
3195¢’M
¢’M¢’M
¢’M ¢’M
49
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCTHE 
FINANCIAL 
STATEMENTS
50
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC      Note   2021  2020   
        GH¢   GH¢ 
Interest income    5      510,992,929        519,463,379   
Interest expense    6     (109,990,417)    (114,251,411)
Net interest income            401,002,512        405,211,968   
Fees & commission income                                                        7     77,475,216      77,148,106  
Fees & commission expense    8     (27,252,208)   (22,847,209)
Net fees and commission income          50,223,008      54,300,897  
Net trading revenue                                                                    9      40,793,352     41,660,244  
Net income from other financial instruments carried at fair value 10     52,835,645     52,417,416  
Other operating income/(expenses)                                                             11        91,439,536       (4,644,872) 
Total other operating income             185,068,533        89,432,788  
Operating income             636,294,053        548,945,653  
Net impairment loss on financial assets    12       (33,407,581)   (33,349,574)
Operating income net of impairment charges            602,886,472      515,596,079 
Personnel expenses    13      (135,516,867)   (128,691,845)
Depreciation and amortization    22a     (34,807,599)   (33,588,164)
Other operating expenses                                                           14     (150,595,307)   (131,686,035)
Profit before income tax             281,966,699        221,630,035  
Income tax expense                                                                        15      (97,637,066)   (67,421,120)
Profit after tax expense             184,329,633         154,208,915   
Other comprehensive income         
Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss        
Debt instruments at fair value through other comprehensive income-      (689,424)     1,781,205    
Less tax           172,356    (445,301)  
Other comprehensive income, net of income tax                                                 (517,069)     1,335,904  
Total comprehensive income for the year              183,812,564        155,544,819 
Earnings per share:         
Basic earnings per share (GH¢)     16        0.260       0.217  
Diluted earnings per share (GH¢)      16       0.260       0.217 STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS AND 
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2021    
51
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCSTATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION 
AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2021   
      Note   2021  2020  
        GH¢   GH¢  
 Assets          
 Cash and cash equivalents    17      963,960,922      1,561,983,616  
 Non-pledged trading assets    18      143,156,280      67,896,476  
 Debt instruments  at fair value through other comprehensive income 21      87,240,744      108,961,776   
 Debt instruments  at  amortised  cost     21      1,383,955,004      427,587,822   
 Loans and advances to customers    20       2,504,366,677       2,562,706,675   
 Equity investments    19       2,923,386       12,236,465  
 Other assets    25        54,130,188        66,511,519  
 Property, plant and equipment    22      255,268,418      290,748,100  
 Intangible assets    23      15,009,794      1,264,470  
 Deferred tax assets    15b        27,010,706         15,309,433  
 Total assets             5,437,022,119         5,115,206,352   
 Liabilities          
 Deposits from banks    28     1,916,501     3,945,938  
 Deposits from customers    28     3,391,140,683      3,481,343,321  
 Borrowings    27     588,864,628     366,266,787  
 Derivative financial liabilities    26   40,509,648 -
 Current tax liabilities    24        21,325,184       25,752,524  
 Other liabilities    29        364,700,138        312,302,893  
 Total liabilities            4,408,456,782        4,189,611,463   
 Shareholders’ fund          
 Stated capital     30      404,245,427      404,245,427  
 Income surplus     40c        207,312,183         149,907,074  
 Revaluation reserve    40d       123,670,260       123,670,260  
 Statutory reserve     40e        292,518,632        246,436,224  
 Other reserves          818,835      1,335,904
 Total shareholders’ fund             1,028,565,337      925,594,889
 Total liabilities and shareholders’ fund             5,437,022,119        5,115,206,352  
 
The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements.
Approved by the Board  and signed on its behalf as follow s:
     
Margaret Boateng Sekyere  (Chairperson)                                          Hakim Ouzzani  (Managing Director)  
25 February 2022        25 February 2022
52
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCStated  
Capital
GH¢
Stated  
Capital
GH¢Income 
surplus
GH¢
Income 
surplus
GH¢Revaluation 
Reserve
GH¢
Revaluation 
Reserve
GH¢Statutory 
reserve
GH¢
Statutory 
reserve
GH¢Other 
reserves
GH¢
Other 
reserves
GH¢Total 
shareholders’ 
equity
GH¢
Total 
shareholders’ 
equity
GH¢STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER  2021
      
For the year ended 31 December 2021       
Balance as at 1 January 2021  404,245,427    149,907,074   123,670,260    246,436,224   1,335,904   925,594,889  
Movements during the year:          
Profit for the year  -     184,329,633      -  -  -     184,329,633   
Other movements in equity:  
Debt Instruments at FVOCI - - - - (517,069) (517,069)
Dividend -   (80,842,116) - - -  (80,842,116)
Transfer to statutory reserve -    (46,082,408) -     46,082,408   -  -   
Balance as at  31 December 2021  404,245,427    207,312,183     123,670,260        292,518,632     818,835      1,028,565,337  
For the year ended 31 December 2020       
Balance as at 1 January 2020  404,245,427   66,161,749   123,670,260   207,883,995  -  801,961,431   
Movements during the year:           
Profit for the year  -      154,208,915    -  -  -  154,208,915  
Other movements in equity:  
Debt Instruments at FVOCI - - - - 1,335,904 1,335,904
Dividend -  (31,911,361) - - -  (31,911,361)
Transfer to statutory reserve -   (38,552,229) -  38,552,229  - -   
Balance as at  31 December 2020 404,245,427  149,907,074   123,670,260   246,436,224   1,335,904   925,594,889 
53
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCSTATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS  
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2021
   
   2021  2020
   GH¢   GH¢ 
 
 Operating activities
 Operating profit before taxation     281,966,699      221,630,035  
 Adjustments for:
 Impairment provision      42,426,979       (42,706,385)
  Fair value adjustment on equity investment   27,729   1,038,501
 Fair value adjustment on non pledged trading assets     (498,926)    797,756 
 Depreciation and amortization    34,807,599    33,588,164 
  Other non cash adjustments       253,315          -
  Derivative revaluation  40,509,648 -
 Unrealized loss  on forex revaluation  1,320,467 5,918,445
 Operating profit before working capital changes        400,813,510           220,266,516     
 Changes in operating and other assets and liabilities
 Change in non-pledged trading assets    (74,760,878)   (11,170,296) 
 Change in loans and advances to customers    27,865,665        123,393,711  
 Change in other assets        7,878,603         (3,997,284)
  Change in deposit from banks    (2,029,438)  (21,729,452) 
 Change in deposit from customers     (90,202,638)  311,637,350  
 Change in other liabilities       54,684,493        79,183,783  
     (76,564,193)    477,317,812    
 Income tax paid   (113,593,324)   (92,903,430)
 
 Net cash flows from  operating activities       210,655,993          604,680,898
   Cash flow from investing activities
 Purchase of  investment securities    (1,032,517,702)   (482,702,414)
 Matured investment securities   97,146,284   31,039,014
 Equity investments   -    (4,412,066)
 Purchase of property, plant and equipment   (9,976,897)   (32,605,733)
 Purchase of intangible assets   (3,096,344)  (397,817)
 Net cash flows used in  investing activities    (948,444,659)    (489,079,017) 
 Cash flow from financing activities
 Proceeds from borrowings       235,912,637        202,544,707    
 Repayment of borrowings   (13,314,795)  (13,973,897)
 Dividend paid   (80,842,116)  (31,911,361)
 Net cash flows from financing activities     141,755,726      156,659,449 
 Change in cash and cash equivalents    (596,032,940)    272,261,330   
 Net foreign exchange and revaluation difference     (1,320,467)  (5,918,445)
 Cash & cash equivalents at 1  January    1,561,983,616      1,295,640,731  
 Cash and cash equivalents  at 31 December     964,630,209      1,561,983,616   
 Operational cash flows from interest:
 Interest received     442,305,272     516,115,683   
 Interest paid   111,201,903    111,882,687  
 Dividend received  - 133,640
54
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC1. Reporting entity 
Societe Generale Ghana PLC (the Bank) is a limited 
liability company incorporated in Ghana under the 
Companies Act, 2019  (Act 992). The Bank is domiciled 
in Ghana with its registered office at 2nd Crescent, 
Royalt Castle Road, Ring Road Central, Accra. The Bank 
is authorized and licensed to carry out the  business of 
banking and provides retail banking, corporate banking, 
investment banking and other financial intermediation 
activities and specialized financing activities such as 
leasing and consumer credits through its network of 
branches and outlets including divisions across Ghana.
The principal activities of the Bank are described in 
the Directors’ Report. Societe Generale (Group), a bank 
incorporated in France, is the ultimate parent of the 
Bank.
The Bank is listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange (GSE).  
This has enabled the equity shares of the Bank to be 
traded publicly on the Ghana Stock Exchange (GSE).
1.1 Authorization for publication
The financial statements of the Bank for the year 
ended 31 December 2021 were authorized for issue in 
accordance with a resolution of the Board of Directors 
on  24 February 2022. 
2. Basis of preparation
2.1 Statement of compliance
These financial statements of the Bank have been 
prepared in accordance with International Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS) as issued by the 
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and 
accounting requirement as dictated by the guide for 
financial publication 2017 issued by the Bank of Ghana. 
Except as otherwise specified by the guide for financial 
publication, the financial statements were prepared in 
accordance with IFRS and other related laws in Ghana.
2.2 Basis of measurement
The financial statements have been prepared on the 
historical cost basis except for the following material 
items that are measured at fair value in the  Statement 
of Financial Position:
 y Financial assets and liabilities held-for-trading.
 y Derivative financial instruments.
 y Equity investments.
2.3 Functional and presentation currency
 The  financial  statements are  presented in Ghana 
Cedis [GH¢], which is the functional and presentational 
currency of the Bank.2.4 Presentation of financial statements
The Bank  presents its statement of  financial position 
in order of liquidity. An analysis regarding recovery or 
settlement within 12 months after the reporting date 
(current )  and more than 12 months after the date is 
presented in Note 37 of these financial statements.
2.5 Accounting policies
The accounting policies adapted by the Bank are 
consistent with  those of the previous financial year.
2.6 Foreign currency transactions
Transactions denominated in foreign currencies 
are  recorded  in  the  functional  currency  using the 
exchange rates prevailing at the date of the transactions. 
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign 
currencies are translated at the functional currency rate 
of exchange ruling at the reporting date.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from 
the  settlement  of  foreign  currency  transactions are 
recognized in profit or loss under the heading “trading 
revenue” . Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting 
from the translation at year-end exchange rates of 
monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign 
currencies are recognized in profit or loss under the 
heading “other operating income’’ .
The effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash 
equivalents held or due in a foreign currency is reported 
in the statement of cash flows as part of the reconciliation 
of cash and cash equivalents at the beginning and end of 
the period. This amount is   presented separately from 
cash flows   from operating, investing and financing 
activities and includes the differences,  if  any, had those 
cash flows  been reported  at end of period exchange 
rates.
2.7 Segmental reporting
IFRS  8  requires the  identification of  operating 
segments to be on the basis of internal reports that are 
reviewed by an entity’s Chief Operating Decision Maker 
(CODM) to allocate resources to the segment and assess 
its performance.
IFRS 8 requires entities whose shares or debts are traded 
publicly to produce a segmental report.
Societe Generale Ghana PLC is managed on a basis 
that takes account of the different business lines that 
dominate the operating activities of the Bank. Major 
business lines of the Bank are:
a. Retail banking.
b. Corporate banking.
c. Treasury.NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31  DECEMBER  2021
55
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCThe banking activities of the Bank have been segmented 
into various business lines. The profitability of these 
business lines  is  assessed based on the profit or  loss 
statement produced. These are illustrated in Note 39.
2.8 Property, plant and equipment - continued
Properties in the course of construction for provision 
of services or administrative purposes are carried 
at cost, less any recognised impairment loss. Cost 
includes professional fees and, for qualifying assets, 
borrowing costs capitalised in accordance with the 
bank’s accounting policy. Such properties are classified 
to the appropriate categories of property, plant and 
equipment when completed and ready for intended use. 
Depreciation of these assets, on the same basis as other 
property assets, commences when the assets are ready 
for their intended use. 
Depreciation on revalued buildings is recognised in 
profit or loss. On the subsequent sale or retirement of a 
revalued property, the attributable revaluation surplus 
remaining in the properties revaluation reserve is 
transferred directly to retained earnings. 
Fixtures and equipment are stated at cost less 
accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment 
losses.
Depreciation is recognised so as to write off the cost 
or valuation of assets (other than freehold land and 
properties under construction) less their residual 
values over their useful lives, using the straight-line 
method. The estimated useful lives, residual values 
and depreciation method are reviewed at the end of 
each reporting period, with the effect of any changes in 
estimate accounted for on a prospective basis. 
The current annual depreciation rates for each class of 
property, plant and equipment are as follows:
Buildings                                                3.0% 
Furniture  and equipment               20.0%
Computer                                               33.3%
Household  furniture                         25.0%
Motor  vehicles                                     33.3% 
Leasehold  land  amortized over leased period
Right of use  assets are amortised  over the shorter of the  
lease term and the asset’s  useful life.
Freehold land not depreciated
Costs   associated   with   routine   servicing   and 
maintenance of assets are expensed as incurred. 
Subsequent expenditure is only capitalized if it is probable that future economic benefits associated with 
the item will flow to the Bank.  
The carrying values of property and equipment are 
reviewed for indications of impairment annually, or 
when events or changes in circumstances indicate 
the carrying value may not be recoverable. If any such 
indication exists and where the carrying values exceed 
the estimated recoverable amount, the assets or cash-
generating units are written down to their recoverable 
amount.
The recoverable amount of property and equipment is 
the greater of fair value less costs to sell and value in use. 
In assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows  
are discounted  to their present value using a  pre-tax  
discount  rate that reflects current market assessments 
of the time value of money and the risks specific to the 
asset.   
An item of property, plant and equipment is 
derecognized upon disposal or when no future economic 
benefits  are expected to arise from the continued use 
of the asset. Any gain or loss arising on derecognizing 
of the asset (calculated as the difference between the 
net disposal  proceeds and the carrying amount of the 
item) is included in profit or loss in the year the item is 
derecognized.
Residual values, useful lives and methods of depreciation 
for property and equipment are reviewed, and adjusted 
if appropriate, at each reporting date.
The new standard IFRS 16 Accounting for leases, which 
became effective on 1 January 2019, has been adopted 
by the bank.   This standard  replaces IAS 17, which was 
governing both operating and finance lease. IFRS 16 
defines lease as a contact that conveys the right to use 
an asset (underlying asset) for a period in exchange for 
a consideration.  Under the new standard, Lessees are 
no longer required to distinguish between finance and 
operating leases. Instead, they are to recognize a right 
of use asset and a corresponding lease liability at the 
inception of the lease and subsequently depreciate the 
asset over the lease term. 
2.9 Intangible assets: computer software 
Costs incurred to acquire and bring to use specific 
computer software licenses are capitalized. Following 
initial recognition, intangible assets are carried at cost 
less accumulated amortization and any impairment 
losses. The amortization period and method for an 
intangible asset, in this case computer software, are 
reviewed at least at each reporting date. Changes in 
the expected useful life in the asset are accounted for 
by changing the amortization period or method, as Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
56
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCappropriate, and treated as changes in accounting 
estimates. The amortization expense on the intangible 
assets is recognized in profit or loss in the expense 
category consistent with the function of the intangible 
asset. Amortisation is calculated using the straight line 
method on the basis of the expected useful lives of the 
assets which range between 3 and 5 years.
The carrying values of intangible assets are reviewed 
for indications of impairment annually or when events 
or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying 
value may not be recoverable.
If any such indication exists and where the carrying 
values exceed the estimated recoverable amount, the 
assets or cash-generating units are written down to their 
recoverable amount.
 The recoverable amount of intangible assets is the 
greater of fair value less costs to sell and value in use. In 
assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows  
are discounted  to their present  value using a pre-tax  
discount  rate that reflects current market assessments 
of the time value of money and the risks specific to the 
asset.
Gains or losses arising from de-recognition of an 
intangible asset are measured  as the difference between 
the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of 
the asset and are recognized in profit or loss when the 
asset is derecognized.
2.10 Provisions
The Bank recognizes provisions when it has a present 
obligation (legal or constructive) as a result of a past 
event and it is probable that an outflow of  resources   
embodying   economic  benefits will be required to 
settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be 
made of the amount of the obligation. Where the Bank 
expects some or all of a provision to be reimbursed, the 
reimbursement is recognized as a separate asset but 
only when the reimbursement is virtually certain.
The expense relating to any provision is presented in 
profit or loss net of any reimbursement.
If the effect of the time value of money is material, 
provisions are determined by discounting the expected  
future cash flows  at a pre-tax  rate that reflects current  
market  assessments   of the time value of money and, 
where appropriate, the risks specific to the liability.
2.11 Employee benefits
The Bank contributes to a three-tier defined contribution 
scheme on behalf of employees. The tier one and two 
are mandatory. The Bank contributes 10% towards the 
voluntary tier three plan.2.12 Revenue
Revenue is recognized to the extent that it is probable 
that the economic benefits will flow to the Bank and 
the revenue can be reliably measured. The following  
specific  recognition criteria are met before revenue is 
recognized:
a. Interest income
Under  IFRS 9 , interest income is recorded using the 
effective interest rate (EIR) method for all financial 
instruments measured at amortised cost and financial 
instruments designated at FVPL. Interest income  on 
interest bearing financial assets measured at FVOCI,  are 
also recorded by using the EIR method. The EIR is the rate 
that exactly discounts estimated future cash receipts 
through the expected life of the financial instrument or, 
when appropriate, a shorter period, to the net carrying 
amount of the financial asset. The EIR (and therefore, 
the amortised cost of the asset) is calculated by taking 
into account any discount or premium on acquisition, 
fees and costs that are an integral part of the EIR. The 
Bank recognises interest income using a rate of return 
that represents the best estimate of a constant rate 
of return over the expected life of the loan. Hence, it 
recognises the effect of potentially different interest 
rates charged at various stages, and other characteristics 
of the product life cycle (including prepayments, penalty 
interest and charges).
If expectations regarding the cash flows on the financial 
asset are revised for reasons other than credit risk, 
the adjustment is booked as a positive or negative 
adjustment to the carrying amount of the asset in 
the statement of financial position with an increase 
or reduction in interest income. The adjustment is 
subsequently amortised through Interest and similar 
income in the statement of profit or loss.
When a financial asset becomes credit-impaired and 
is, therefore, regarded as ‘Stage 3’ , the Bank calculates 
interest income by applying the effective interest rate 
to the net amortised cost of the financial asset. If the 
financial assets cures and is no longer credit-impaired, 
the Bank reverts to calculating interest income on a 
gross basis.
For purchased or originated credit-impaired (POCI) 
financial assets the Bank calculates interest income by 
calculating the credit-adjusted EIR and applying that rate 
to the amortised cost of the asset. The credit-adjusted 
EIR is the interest rate that, at original recognition, 
discounts the estimated future cash flows (including 
credit losses) to the amortised cost of the POCI assets.
Interest income on all trading assets and financial 
assets mandatorily required to be measured at FVPL 
is recognised using the contractual interest rate in net 
trading income and Net gains/(losses) on financial Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
57
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCassets at fair value through profit or loss, respectively.
b. Commissions and fees
Commission and fees, revenues and expenses that are 
integral part of financial instruments and are included 
in the measurement  of the effective interest rate are 
spread over the period of the financial  instruments. 
Commission and fees in respect of services are 
recognized in the profit or loss statement  when the 
related services are performed. The Bank’s revenue 
contracts do not typically include multiple performance 
obligations.
The Bank earns commission and fees from a diverse 
range of services provided to its customers. Fees  
revenue is accounted  for as follows:
 y Revenue   is earned  on execution  of discrete act 
(such as funds transfers, special clearing and fees 
arising from negotiating transactions with third 
parties) is recognized as revenue when the act is 
completed.
 y Income earned  from the provision  of services (such 
as request for special statements, safe custody, 
COTs and advisory services) is recognized as 
revenue as the services are provided.
 y Fees  which forms an  integral part  of  the effective 
interest rate of a financial instrument (such as 
commitment and processing fees on corporate 
loans) is recognized as an adjustment to the 
effective interest rate.
c. Other operating income
This is made up of other operating income including 
bad debts recovered, dividend, profit or loss on sale of 
property, plant and equipment, other miscellaneous 
incomes and exchange gains.
2.13 Interest expense
Interest  expense is recognized in profit or loss for 
all interest-bearing financial instruments measured 
at amortized cost, including loans and advances, as 
interest accrues using the effective interest rate method.
The effective interest method is a method of calculating 
the amortized cost of a financial liability and of allocating 
the interest expense.
The effective interest rate is the rate that exactly 
discounts  the  estimated future cash payments over the 
expected life of the instrument or, when appropriate, 
a shorter period, to the net carrying amount of the 
financial liability.
2.14 Taxation
Income tax charged to the profit or loss account for the 
year comprises current tax and deferred tax. Income tax 
is recognized in profit or loss except to the extent that 
it relates to items recognized directly in shareholders’ equity or other comprehensive income, in which 
case it is recognized in shareholders’ equity or other 
comprehensive income.
a. Corporate income tax
Corporate tax is the tax expected to be payable under 
the Income Tax Act, 2018  (Act 979) on the taxable profit 
for the year, calculated using the tax rates enacted or 
substantially enacted by the reporting date, and any 
adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous years. 
Corporate tax assets and liabilities  are offset when the 
Bank intends to settle on net basis and the legal right to 
set off exists.
Corporate income tax relating to items recognized 
directly in equity or other comprehensive income is 
recognized in equity or other comprehensive income 
and not in profit or loss.
b. Deferred income tax
Deferred tax liabilities are recognized for all taxable 
temporary differences, except:
 y Where  the deferred  tax liability arises from the 
initial recognition of goodwill or of an asset or 
liability in a transaction that is not a business 
combination and, at the time of the transaction, 
affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable 
profit or loss.
 y In  respect  of taxable temporary  differences 
associated with investments in subsidiaries, 
associates and interests in joint ventures, where 
the timing of the reversal of the temporary 
differences can be controlled and it is probable that 
the temporary differences will not reverse in the 
foreseeable future.
Deferred tax assets are recognized  for all deductible 
temporary differences, carry forward of unused tax 
credits and unused tax losses, to the extent that it is 
probable that taxable profit will be available against 
which the deductible  temporary  differences,  and the 
carry forward of unused tax credits and unused tax 
losses can be utilized, except:
 y Where the deferred  tax asset relating to the 
deductible  temporary  difference  arises from 
the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a 
transaction that is not a business combination and, 
at the time of the transaction,  affects neither the 
accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss.
In  respect of  deductible temporary differences 
associated with investments in subsidiaries, associates 
and interests in joint ventures, deferred tax assets are 
recognized only to the extent that it is probable that the 
temporary differences will reverse in the foreseeable  
future and taxable profit will be available against  which 
the temporary differences can be utilized.
Deferred tax is calculated using the rate expected to Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
58
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCapply in the period in which the assets will be realized or 
the liabilities settled. Deferred tax assets and liabilities 
are offset when they arise in the same tax reporting 
entities and relate to income taxes levied by the same 
taxation authority, and when a legal right to set off exists 
in the entity.
The carrying amount of deferred income tax assets 
is reviewed at each reporting date and reduced to the 
extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable 
profit will be available to allow all or part of the deferred 
income tax asset to be utilized.
Deferred tax relating to items recognized directly in 
equity or other comprehensive income is recognized in 
equity or other comprehensive income and not in profit 
or loss.
c. Value added Tax -VAT
Revenues, expenses and assets are recognized net of the 
amount of VAT except:
 y Where the value added tax incurred on a purchase 
of goods and services is not recoverable from 
the taxation authority, the value added tax is 
recognized as part of the cost of acquisition of the 
asset or as part of the expense item as applicable; 
and accounts receivable and payable are stated 
with the amount of value added tax included.
 y The net amount of value added tax recoverable 
from, or payable to, the Ghana Revenue Authority 
is included as part of receivable or payable in the 
statement of financial position.
2.15 National stabilization levy
Under the National Fiscal Stabilization Levy Act, 2013 of 
Ghana, financial institutions and some large firms were  
required  to pay a levy of 5% of their profit before tax 
towards  fiscal stabilization with effect from July 2013. 
The Bank has complied with this statutory obligation.
2.16 Financial Sector Recovery Levy
Under the Financial Sector Recovery  Act, 2021 (Act 1067) 
of Ghana, Banks (excluding rural and community banks) 
were  required  to pay a levy of 5% of their profit before 
tax to raise revenue to support the financial sector 
reforms and for other matters. The Act was gazetted 
on 31 March, 2021. The Bank has complied with this 
statutory obligation. 
2.17 Classification & measurement of financial assets and 
liabilities
2.17.1  Recognition and initial measurement
The Bank on the date of origination or purchase 
recognizes loans, debt and equity securities, deposits 
and subordinated debentures at the fair value of consideration paid. Regular-way purchases and sales 
of financial assets are recognized on the settlement 
date. All other financial assets and liabilities, including 
derivatives, are initially recognized on the trade date 
at which the Bank becomes a party to the contractual 
provisions of the instrument.
The initial measurement of a financial asset or liability 
is at fair value plus transaction costs that are directly 
attributable to its purchase or issuance. For instruments 
measured at fair value through profit or loss, transaction 
costs are recognized immediately in profit or loss.
Financial assets include both debt and equity 
instruments.
2.17.2  Debt instruments
Debt instruments, including loans and debt securities, 
are classified into one of the following measurement 
categories:
 y Amortized cost;
 y Fair value through other comprehensive income 
(FVOCI); or
 y Fair value through profit or loss (FVTPL) for trading 
related assets
Classification of debt instruments is determined based 
on:
i. the business model under which the asset is 
held; and
ii. the contractual cash flow characteristics of the 
instrument
2.17.3  Business model assessment
Business model assessment involves determining 
whether financial assets are managed in order to 
generate cash flows from collection of contractual 
cash flows, selling financial assets or both. The Bank 
assesses business model at a portfolio level reflective 
of how group of assets are managed together to achieve 
a particular business objective. For the assessment of 
business model the Bank takes into consideration the 
following factors:
 y how the performance of assets in a portfolio is 
evaluated and reported to group heads and other 
key decision makers within the Bank’s business 
lines;
 y the risks that affect the performance of assets held 
within a business model and how those risks are 
managed;
 y whether the assets held for trading purposes i.e., 
assets that the Bank acquires or incurs principally 
for the purpose of selling or repurchasing in the Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
59
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCnear term, or holds as part of a portfolio that is 
managed together for short-term profit or position 
taking;
 y the frequency and volume of sales in prior periods 
and expectations about future sales activity.
2.17.4  Cash flow characteristics assessment
The contractual cash flow characteristics assessment 
involves assessing the contractual features of an 
instrument to determine if they give rise to cash flows 
that are consistent with a basic lending arrangement. 
Contractual cash flows are consistent with a basic 
lending arrangement if they represent cash flows that 
are Solely Payments of Principal and Interest on the 
principal amount outstanding (SPPI).
Principal is defined as the fair value of the instrument at 
initial recognition. Principal may change over the life of 
the instruments due to repayments.
Interest is defined as consideration for the time value of 
money and the credit risk associated with the principal 
amount outstanding and for other basic lending risks 
and costs (liquidity risk and administrative costs), as 
well as a profit margin.
In performing this assessment, the Bank takes into 
consideration contractual features that could change 
the amount or timing of contractual cash flows, such 
that the cash flows are no longer consistent with a 
basic lending arrangement. If the Bank identifies any 
contractual features that could modify the cash flows of 
the instrument such that they are no longer consistent 
with a basic lending arrangement, the related financial 
asset is classified and measured at FVTPL. Non pledged 
trading assets and derivative assets of the bank are 
measured under FVTPL whilst Loans and advances are 
measured under amortised cost based on their cashflow 
characteristics and business model.
2.17.5  Debt instruments measured at amortized cost
Debt instruments are measured at amortized cost if they 
are held within a business model whose objective is to 
hold for collection of contractual cash flows where those 
cash flows represent solely payments of principal and 
interest. After initial measurement, debt instruments 
in this category are carried at amortized cost using the 
effective interest rate method. The effective interest 
rate is the rate that discounts estimated future cash 
payments or receipts through the expected life of the 
financial asset to the gross carrying amount of a financial 
asset. Amortized cost is calculated taking into account 
any discount or premium on acquisition, transaction 
costs and fees that are an integral part of the effective 
interest rate. Investment securities are measured under 
amortised cost.Impairment on debt instruments measured at 
amortized cost is calculated using the expected credit 
loss approach. Loans and debt securities measured at 
amortized cost are presented net of the allowance for 
credit losses in the statement of financial position.
Debt instruments measured at FVTPL include assets 
held for trading purposes, assets held as part of a 
portfolio managed on a fair value basis and assets whose 
cash flows do not represent payments that are solely 
payments of principal and interest. These instruments 
are measured at fair value in the Statement of Financial 
Position, with transaction costs recognized immediately 
in the profit or loss statement as part of net income from 
other financial instruments carried at fair value. Realized 
and unrealized gains and losses are recognized as part of 
Non-interest income in the profit or loss statement. Non 
pledged trading assets and derivative assets of the bank 
are measured under FVTPL.
2.17.6  Debt instruments measured at FVOCI
Debt instruments are  measured at FVOCI only  if  the 
assets  are held within a business model whose objective 
is achieved by  collecting contractual cash flows and 
selling financial assets; and the contractual terms of the 
financial asset give rise on specified dates to cash flows 
that are Solely Payments of Principal and Interest (SPPI) 
and such assets have not been designated as at  FVTPL.
In addition, on initial recognition, the Bank may 
irrevocably designate a financial asset that otherwise 
meets the requirements to be measured at amortised 
cost or at FVOCI as at FVTPL  if doing so eliminates or 
significantly reduces an accounting mismatch that 
would otherwise arise.
2.17.7  Equity instruments
Equity instruments are measured at FVTPL, unless 
an election is made to designate them at FVOCI upon 
purchase. For equity instruments measured at FVTPL, 
changes in fair value are recognized as part of Non-
interest income in the profit or loss statement. An 
election has not been made to designate any of the 
equity instrument at FVOCI as such all equity instruments 
are measured at FVTPL in the current year.
The Bank can elect to classify non-trading equity 
instruments at FVOCI. This election will be used for 
certain equity investments for strategic or longer term 
investment purposes. The FVOCI election is made upon 
initial recognition, on an instrument-by-instrument 
basis and once made is irrevocable. Gains and losses 
on these instruments including when derecognized/
sold are recorded in OCI and are not subsequently 
reclassified to the profit or loss. Dividends received are 
recorded in other operating expenses/income  in the  
Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
60
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCIncome.  Any transaction costs incurred upon purchase 
of the security are added to the cost basis of the security 
and are not reclassified to the  profit or loss on sale of 
the security. Equity instruments at FVOCI are not subject 
to an impairment assessment. An election has not been 
made to designate any of the equity instrument at FVOCI 
as such all equity instruments are measured at FVTPL in 
the current year.
2.17.8  Financial liabilities
Financial liabilities  are classified as non-trading, held 
for trading or designated as held at fair value through 
profit or loss. Non-trading liabilities are recorded at 
amortized cost applying the effective interest method.  
Held for trading liabilities or liabilities designated as 
held at fair value through profit or loss, are accounted 
for as indicated above. A financial liability (trading or 
other) is removed from the balance sheet when it is 
extinguished – that is, when the obligation is discharged, 
cancelled or expired. The condition is met when the 
liability is settled by paying the creditor, or when the 
debtor is released from primary responsibility for the 
liability either by process of law or by the creditor. A 
gain or loss on extinguishment of a financial liability is 
recognised in the profit or loss statement. Any net cash 
flow in relation to the restructuring of financial liabilities 
is an adjustment to the debt’s carrying amount and is 
amortised over the remaining life of the liability.
2.17.9  Impairment
a. Scope
The Bank applies a three-stage approach to measure 
allowance for credit losses, using an expected credit 
loss approach as required under IFRS 9, for the following 
categories of financial instruments that are not 
measured at fair value through profit or loss:
 y Amortized cost financial assets;
 y Debt securities classified as at FVOCI;
 y Off-balance sheet loan commitments; and
 y Financial guarantee contracts.
Financial assets migrate through three stages based on 
the change in credit risk since initial recognition.
b. COVID-19 considerations
Bank-specific changes
SG Ghana as a result of the regulatory directives linked 
to the COVID pandemic introduced changes to how it 
previously conducted its business. The bank granted 
Reliefs/Moratoriums to Corporate and Retail clients whose sectors or activity were impacted by the Pandemic 
crises. SG Ghana supported its clients financially to 
enable them contribute positively to the fight against 
the pandemic. The bank enhanced its appraisal and 
monitoring methods in view of the potential risk 
inherent within the business environment.  Additionally, 
debt collection processes were modified to take into 
account the challenges presented by the Pandemic. 
The bank aligned its regulatory provision methods with 
the regulatory directives and reduced its provisions 
for loans in the “Other Loans Especially Mentioned” 
(OLEM) category from ten percent to five percent. This 
impacted the qualitative considerations in impairment 
computation as well as the regulatory credit reserve of 
the banks.
Restructurings were performed in line with regulatory 
directives for clients in vulnerable sectors however the 
impact of this on our impairments was minimal as the 
Bank’s portfolio was largely resilient under the COVID 
crisis context.
c. Expected credit loss impairment model
The Bank’s allowance for credit losses calculations 
are outputs of models with a number of underlying 
assumptions regarding the choice of variable inputs 
and their interdependencies. The expected credit loss 
impairment model reflects the present value of all cash 
shortfalls related to default events either (i) over the 
following twelve months or (ii) over the expected life of a 
financial instrument depending on credit deterioration 
from inception. The allowance for credit losses reflects 
an unbiased, probability-weighted outcome which 
considers multiple scenarios based on reasonable and 
supportable forecasts.
This impairment model measures credit loss allowances 
using a three-stage approach based on the extent of 
credit deterioration since origination:
 y Stage 1 – Where there has not been a significant 
increase in credit risk (SIR) since initial recognition 
of a financial instrument, an amount equal to 
12 months expected credit loss is recorded. The 
expected credit loss is computed using a probability 
of default occurring over the next 12 months. 
For those instruments with a remaining maturity 
of less than 12 months, a probability of default 
corresponding to remaining term to maturity is 
used.
 y Stage 2 – When a financial instrument experiences a 
SIR subsequent to origination but is not considered 
to be in default, it is included in Stage 2. This requires 
the computation of expected credit loss based 
on the probability of default over the remaining 
estimated life of the financial instrument.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
61
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC y Stage 3 – Financial instruments that are considered 
to be in default are included in this stage. Similar to 
Stage 2, the allowance for credit losses captures the 
lifetime expected credit losses.
d. Measurement of expected credit loss
The probability of default (PD), exposure at default 
(EAD), and loss given default (LGD) inputs used to 
estimate expected credit losses are modelled based on 
macroeconomic variables that are most closely related 
with credit losses in the relevant portfolio. The bank’s 
portfolios have been segmented to ensure that they are 
consistent in terms of risk characteristics and to ensure 
better correlation with  local macroeconomic variables. 
This segmentation factors in all specific characteristics 
associated with the bank’s activities.
Details of these statistical parameters/inputs are as 
follows:
 y PD – The probability of default is an estimate of the 
likelihood of default over a given time horizon. A 
default may only happen at a certain time over the 
remaining estimated life, if the facility has not been 
previously derecognized and is still in the portfolio.
 y EAD – The exposure at default is an estimate of 
the exposure at a future default date, taking into 
account expected changes in the exposure after the 
reporting date, including repayments of principal 
and interest, whether scheduled by contract or 
otherwise, expected drawdowns on committed 
facilities, and accrued interest from missed 
payments.
 y LGD – The loss given default is an estimate of the 
loss arising in the case where a default occurs at a 
given time. It is based on the difference between 
the contractual cash flows due and those that the 
lender would expect to receive, including from the 
realization of any collateral. It is usually expressed 
as a percentage of the EAD.
e. Forward-looking information
The Bank on a yearly basis analyses trends of probability 
of default, default rates, impairment expense amongst 
others and how these have evolved in line with the 
evolution of both historic and future key macro-
economic variables. The key macro-economic variables 
that may have influenced risk levels include GDP growth, 
Inflation rates, unemployment rates, exchange rates 
amongst others.  A study of both parameters is done to 
establish any possible correlation which then results in 
the application of an overlay. 
The bank’s portfolio had a minimal impact from COVID. 
As a result, there was no overlay specifically linked to COVID.
f. Macroeconomic factors
In its models, the Bank relies on a broad range of forward 
looking information as economic inputs, such as: GDP 
growth, inflation rates and central bank base rates. The 
inputs and models used for calculating expected credit 
losses may not always capture all characteristics of the 
market at the date of the financial statements. To reflect 
this, qualitative adjustments or overlays may be made as 
temporary adjustments using expert credit judgement.
The Bank determines allowance for credit losses using 
three probability-weighted forward-looking scenarios. 
The Bank considers both internal and external sources 
of information in order to achieve an unbiased measure 
of the scenarios used. The forecasts are created using 
internal and external models/data which are then 
modified to reflect future direction of relevant economic 
variables as well as a representative range of other 
possible forecast scenarios.
The most likely outcome is aligned with information 
used by the Bank for other purposes such as strategic 
planning and budgeting.  The Bank has identified and 
documented key drivers of credit risk and credit losses 
for each portfolio of financial instruments and, using an 
analysis of historical data, has estimated relationships 
between macro-economic variables, credit risk and 
credit losses.
g. Assessment of significant increase in credit risk 
(SIR)
At each reporting date, the Bank assesses whether there 
has been a significant increase in credit risk for exposures 
since initial recognition by comparing the risk of default 
occurring over the remaining expected life from the 
reporting date and the date of initial recognition. The 
assessment considers borrower-specific quantitative 
and qualitative information without consideration 
of collateral, and the impact of forward-looking 
macroeconomic factors.
The common assessments for SIR on retail and 
non-retail portfolios include macroeconomic 
outlook, management judgement, delinquency and 
monitoring. Forward looking macroeconomic factors 
are a key component of the macroeconomic outlook. 
The importance and relevance of each specific 
macroeconomic factor depends on the type of product, 
characteristics of the financial instruments and the 
borrower . Quantitative models may not always be able 
to capture all reasonable and supportable information 
that may indicate a significant increase in credit risk. 
Qualitative factors may be assessed to supplement 
the gap. Examples of situations include changes in 
adjudication criteria for a particular group of borrowers; Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
62
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCchanges in portfolio composition and natural disasters 
impacting certain portfolios. With regards to delinquency 
and monitoring, there is a rebuttable presumption that 
the credit risk of the financial instrument has increased 
since initial recognition when contractual payments are 
more than 30 days overdue.
Retail portfolio – For retail exposures, a significant 
increase in credit risk cannot be assessed using forward 
looking information at an individual account level. 
Therefore, the assessment must be done at the segment 
level. Segment migration thresholds exist for each PD 
model by product which considers the proportionate 
change in PD as well as the absolute change in PD. The 
thresholds used for PD migration are reviewed and 
assessed at least annually, unless there is a significant 
change in credit risk management practices in which 
case the review is brought forward.
Non-retail portfolio – The Bank uses a risk rating scale 
(IG codes) for its non-retail exposures. All non-retail 
exposures have an IG code assigned that reflects the 
probability of default of the borrower. Both borrower 
specific and non-borrower specific (i.e macroeconomic) 
forward looking information is considered and reflected 
in the IG rating. Significant increase in credit risk is 
evaluated based on the migration of the exposures 
among IG codes.
h. Expected life
When measuring expected credit loss, the Bank 
considers the maximum contractual period over which 
the Bank is exposed to credit risk. All contractual terms 
are considered when determining the expected life, 
including prepayment, and extension and rollover 
options. For certain revolving credit facilities,the 
expected life is estimated based on the period over 
which the Bank is exposed to credit risk and how the 
credit losses are mitigated by management actions.
Presentation of allowance for credit losses in the 
Statement of Financial Position
 y Financial assets measured at amortized cost: as a 
deduction from the gross carrying amount of the 
financial assets;
 y Debt instruments measured at fair value through 
other comprehensive income: no allowance is 
recognized in the Statement of Financial Position 
because the carrying value of these assets is their 
fair value. However, the allowance determined is 
presented in the accumulated other comprehensive 
income;
 y Off-balance sheet credit risks include undrawn 
lending commitments, letters of credit and letters 
of guarantee: as a provision in other liabilities.i. Modified financial assets
If the terms of a financial asset are modified or an existing 
financial asset is replaced with a new one, an assessment 
is made to determine if the financial asset should be 
derecognized. Where the modification does not result 
in derecognition, the date of origination continues to 
be used to determine SIR. Where modification results in 
derecognition, the modified financial asset is considered 
to be a new asset.
j. Definition of default
The Bank considers a financial instrument to be in default 
as a result of one or more loss events that occurred after 
the date of initial recognition of the instrument and 
the loss event has a negative impact on the estimated 
future cash flows of the instrument that can be reliably 
estimated. This includes events that indicate:
 y significant financial difficulty of the borrower;
 y default or delinquency in interest or principal 
payments;
 y high probability of the borrower entering a phase of 
bankruptcy or a financial reorganization;
 y measurable decrease in the estimated future cash 
flows from the loan or the underlying assets that 
back the loan.
The Bank considers that default has occurred and 
classifies the financial asset as impaired when it is 
more than 90 days past due unless reasonable and 
supportable information demonstrates that a more 
lagging default criterion is appropriate.
k. Write-off policy
The Bank writes off an impaired financial asset (and 
the related impairment allowance), either partially or 
in full, when there is no realistic prospect of recovery. 
Where financial assets are secured, write-off is generally 
after receipt of any proceeds from the realization of 
security. In circumstances where the net realizable value 
of any collateral has been determined and there is no 
reasonable expectation of further recovery, write-off  
may be earlier. Credit card receivables 180 days past due, 
are written-off. In subsequent periods, any recoveries 
of amounts previously written off are credited to the 
provision for credit losses in the profit or loss statement.
l. Restructured credit
Loans issued by the Bank may be subject to restructuring 
with the aim of securing the collection of the principal and 
interest by adjusting the contractual terms of the loan 
(e.g. reduced interest rate, rescheduled loan payments, 
partial debt forgiveness or additional collateral). Assets 
may only qualify for restructuring where the borrower is 
experiencing financial difficulties or insolvency (whether Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
63
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCthe borrower has already become insolvent or is certain 
to become insolvent if the loan is not restructured).
Where they still pass the SPPI test, restructured loans 
are still recorded in the Statement of Financial Position 
and their amortised cost prior to impairment is adjusted 
for a discount representing the negative difference 
between the present value of the new contractual cash 
flows resulting from the restructuring of the loan and 
the amortised cost prior to impairment less any partial 
debt forgiveness. This discount, representing earnings 
foregone, is booked to cost of risk in the Statement 
of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income 
.As a result, the associated interest income is still 
subsequently recognised at the initial effective interest 
rate of the loans. Post-restructuring, these assets are 
systematically classified in Stage 3 for impairment 
(credit-impaired exposures), as the borrowers are 
deemed to be in default. Stage 3 classification is 
maintained for at least one year, or longer if the Bank is 
uncertain that the borrowers will be able to meet their 
commitments. Once the loan is no longer classified in 
stage 3, the assessment of the significant increase of 
credit risk will be performed by comparing the credit 
risk level at the closing date and the level at the initial 
recognition date of the loan before restructuring.
m. Repossessed Properties /Collaterals
In its normal course of business, the Bank does not 
physically repossess properties or other assets in its 
loan portfolio, but engages external agents to recover 
funds, generally at auction, to settle outstanding debt. 
Any surplus funds are returned to the customers/
obligors. As a result of this practice, the properties under 
legal repossession processes are not recorded on the 
Statement of Financial position.
2.18 Regulatory credit reserve
To cater for any excess of Bank of Ghana’s credit loss 
provision requirements over loans and advances 
impairments based on IFRS principles, a transfer is made 
from the income surplus (distributable reserves) to a 
non- distributable reserves in the statement of changes 
in equity, being the Regulatory Credit Reserve.
The non-distributable Regulatory Credit Reserve ensures 
that minimum regulatory provisioning requirements as 
established by the  Bank of Ghana are maintained.
2.19 Dividend
Dividends declared are treated as an appropriation of 
profit in  the year of approval while dividends proposed  
are disclosed as a note to the financial statements.2.20 Cash and cash equivalents
For the purposes  of the statement  of cash flow, cash 
and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand, cash and 
balances with the Central B    ank of Ghana and amounts  
due from banks  and other financial institutions.
2.21 Borrowing
Borrowings by the Bank are initially recognized at 
fair value and there after stated at amortized cost. 
Associated net transaction costs of borrowings are 
recognized in  the Statement of profit or loss and Other 
Comprehensive income  over the maturity period of the 
borrowings.
2.22 Repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements 
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase at 
a  specified future date are not derecognized in  the 
Statement of Financial Position as the Bank retains 
substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership. 
The corresponding cash received is recognized  in  
the statement  of financial position as an asset with 
corresponding obligation to return it, including accrued 
interest as a liability within Cash collateral on securities 
lent and repurchase agreements,  reflecting the 
transaction’s  economic substance  as a loan to the Bank. 
The difference between the sale and repurchase prices 
is treated as interest expense and is accrued over the 
life of agreement using the Effective Interest Rate (EIR). 
When the counterparty has the right to sell or re- pledge 
the securities, the Bank reclassifies those securities in 
its statement  of financial position to Financial assets 
held for trading pledged as collateral or to Financial 
investments FVOCI pledged as collateral, as appropriate.
Conversely, securities purchased under agreements to 
resell at a specified  future date are not recognized in the 
statement of financial  position. The consideration paid, 
including accrued interest, is recorded  in the statement 
of financial position, within Cash collateral on securities 
borrowed and reverse repurchase agreements, reflecting 
the transaction’s economic substance as a loan by the 
Bank. The difference between the purchase  and resale 
prices is recorded in Net interest income and is accrued 
over the life of the agreement using the EIR.
If   securities   purchased   under   agreement   to resell 
are subsequently sold to third parties, the obligation to 
return the securities is recorded as a short sale within 
Financial liabilities held for trading and measured at fair 
value with any gains or losses included in Net trading 
revenue.
2.23 Financial guarantees, letters of credit and undrawn 
loan commitments
Financial guarantees are initially recognised in the 
financial statements (within Provisions) at fair value, 
being the premium received. Subsequent to initial Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
64
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCrecognition, the Bank’s liability under each guarantee 
is measured at the higher of the amount initially 
recognised less cumulative amortisation recognised in 
the Statement of profit or loss and Other Comprehensive 
income. The premium received is recognised in the 
Statement of profit or loss and Other Comprehensive 
income in Net fees and commission income on a straight 
line basis over the life of the guarantee.
Undrawn loan commitments and letters of credits are 
commitments under which, over the duration of the 
commitment, the Bank is required to provide a loan with 
pre-specified terms to the customer.
2.23 Other Assets
Other current assets is a default classification for assets 
which cannot be classified under any of the major 
assets classification on the face of the account, or are  
immaterial and need to be aggregated for presentation 
in a single line item in the Statement of Financial 
Position . Accounts included in the other current assets 
classification may includes inventory of consumables, 
prepayments and sundry debtors.
3.0 Significant Accounting Estimates, Assumptions & 
Judgments
The preparation of financial statements, in conformity 
with the provisions of IFRS, requires management 
to make estimates, apply judgments and make 
assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets 
and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and 
income and expenses made during the reporting period. 
Estimates made by management are based on historical 
experience and other assumptions that are believed to 
be reasonable. Key areas where management has made 
difficult, complex or subjective judgments, often as a 
result of matters that are inherently uncertain, include 
those relating to the allowance for impairement(Note 
2.16.9) and  the fair value of financial instruments (note 
35). While management makes its best estimates and 
assumptions, actual results could differ from these 
estimates and assumptions.
3.1 Deferred tax assets
Deferred tax assets are recognized for all unused tax 
losses to the extent that it is probable that taxable 
profit will  be available against which the losses can be  
utilized.  Significant management judgment is required 
to determine the amount of deferred tax assets that can 
be recognized based upon the likely timing and level of 
future taxable profits together with future tax planning 
strategies. Deferred tax is shown in Note 15b.
4. Application of new and revised International 
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRSs)
4.1 Standards and interpretations in issue but not yet effective
 The new and amended standards and interpretations 
that are issued, but not yet effective, up to the date of 
issuance of the Bank’s financial statements are disclosed 
below. The Bank intends to adopt these new and 
amended standards and interpretations, if applicable, 
when they become effective.
IFRS 17 – Insurance contracts
In May 2017, the IASB issued IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts (IFRS 
17), a comprehensive new accounting standard for insurance 
contracts covering recognition and measurement, presentation 
and disclosure. Once effective, IFRS 17 will replace IFRS 4 
Insurance Contracts (IFRS 4) that was issued in 2005. IFRS 17 
applies to all types of insurance contracts (i.e., life, non-life, 
direct insurance and re-insurance), regardless of the type 
of entities that issue them, as well as to certain guarantees 
and financial instruments with discretionary participation 
features. A few scope exceptions will apply. IFRS 17 introduces 
new accounting requirement for banking products with 
insurance features that may affect the determination of which 
instruments or which components thereof will be in the scope 
of IFRS 9 or IFRS 17.
Loan contracts that meet the definition of insurance but limit 
the compensation for insured events to the amount otherwise 
required to settle the policyholder’s obligation created by the 
contract: Issuers of such loans – e.g. a loan with waiver on 
death – have an option to apply IFRS 9 or IFRS 17. The election 
would be made at a portfolio level and would be irrevocable.
IFRS 17 is effective for reporting periods beginning on or after 
1 January 2023, with comparative figures required. Early 
application is permitted, provided the entity also applies IFRS 9 
and IFRS 15 on or before the date it first applies IFRS 17.
The Bank is currently in the process of assessing the impact of 
adopting IFRS 17 on its financial statements.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments – Fees in the ’10 per cent’ test 
for derecognition of financial liabilities
As part of its 2018-2020 Annual Improvements to IFRS 
standards process, the IASB issued an amendment to IFRS 9. 
The amendment clarifies the fees that an entity includes when 
assessing whether the terms of a new or modified financial 
liability are substantially different from the terms of the 
original financial liability. These fees include only those paid or 
received between the borrower and the lender, including fees 
paid or received by either the borrower or lender on the other’s 
behalf. An entity applies the amendment to financial liabilities 
that are modified or exchanged on or after the beginning of the 
annual reporting period in which the entity first applies the 
amendment.
The amendment is effective for annual reporting periods 
beginning on or after 1 January 2022 with earlier adoption 
permitted. The Bank will apply the amendments to financial 
liabilities that are modified or exchanged on or after the Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
65
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCfinancial liabilities that are modified or exchanged on or after 
the beginning of the annual period in which it will first apply the 
amendment and does not expect this will result in a material 
impact on its financial statements.
Definition of Accounting Estimates - Amendments to IAS 8
In February 2021, the IASB issued amendments to IAS 8, in 
which it introduces a definition of ‘accounting estimates. 
The amendments clarify the distinction between changes in 
accounting estimates and changes in accounting policies and 
the correction of errors. Also, they clarify how entities use 
measurement techniques and inputs to develop accounting 
estimates.
The amendments are effective for annual reporting periods 
beginning on or after 1 January 2023 and apply to changes in 
accounting policies and changes in accounting estimates that 
occur on or after the start of that period. Earlier application is 
permitted as long as this fact is disclosed.
The amendments are not expected to have a material impact 
on the Bank.
Disclosure of Accounting Policies - Amendments to IAS 1 and 
IFRS Practice Statement 2
In February 2021, the IASB issued amendments to IAS 1 and 
IFRS Practice Statement 2 Making Materiality Judgements, in 
which it provides guidance and examples to help entities apply 
materiality judgements to accounting policy disclosures. The 
amendments aim to help entities provide accounting policy 
disclosures that are more useful by replacing the requirement 
for entities to disclose their ‘significant’ accounting policies 
with a requirement to disclose their ‘material’ accounting 
policies and adding guidance on how entities apply the 
concept of materiality in making decisions about accounting 
policy disclosures.
The amendments to IAS 1 are applicable for annual periods 
beginning on or after 1 January 2023 with earlier application 
permitted. Since the amendments to the Practice Statement 
2 provide non-mandatory guidance on the application of the 
definition of material to accounting policy information, an 
effective date for these amendments is not necessary.
The Bank is currently assessing the impact of the amendments 
to determine the impact they will have on the Bank’s accounting 
policy disclosures.
Amendments to IAS 1: Classification of Liabilities as Current 
or Non-current
In January 2020, the IASB issued amendments to paragraphs 
69 to 76 of IAS 1 to specify the requirements for classifying 
liabilities as current or non-current. The amendments clarify:
 y What is meant by a right to defer settlement
 y That a right to defer must exist at the end of the reporting 
period
 y That classification is unaffected by the likelihood that an entity will exercise its deferral right
 y That only if an embedded derivative in a convertible 
liability is itself an equity instrument would the terms of a 
liability not impact its classification
 
The amendments are effective for annual reporting periods 
beginning on or after 1 January 2023 and must be applied 
retrospectively. The Bank is currently assessing the impact 
the amendments will have on current practice and whether 
existing loan agreements may require renegotiation.
Reference to the Conceptual Framework – Amendments to 
IFRS 3
In May 2020, the IASB issued Amendments to IFRS 3 Business 
Combinations - Reference to the Conceptual Framework. 
The amendments are intended to replace a reference to the 
Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial 
Statements, issued in 1989, with a reference to the Conceptual 
Framework for Financial Reporting issued in March 2018 
without significantly changing its requirements.
The Board also added an exception to the recognition principle 
of IFRS 3 to avoid the issue of potential ‘day 2’gains or losses 
arising for liabilities and contingent liabilities that would 
be within the scope of IAS 37 or IFRIC 21 Levies, if incurred 
separately.
At the same time, the Board decided to clarify existing guidance 
in IFRS 3 for contingent assets that would not be affected by 
replacing the reference to the Framework for the Preparation 
and Presentation of Financial Statements.
The amendments are effective for annual reporting periods 
beginning on or after 1 January 2022 and apply prospectively.
Property, Plant and Equipment: Proceeds before Intended 
Use – Amendments to IAS 16
In May 2020, the IASB issued Property, Plant and Equipment 
— Proceeds before Intended Use, which prohibits entities 
deducting from the cost of an item of property, plant and 
equipment, any proceeds from selling items produced while 
bringing that asset to the location and condition necessary 
for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by 
management. Instead, an entity recognises the proceeds from 
selling such items, and the costs of producing those items, in 
profit or loss.
The amendment is effective for annual reporting periods 
beginning on or after 1 January 2022 and must be applied 
retrospectively to items of property, plant and equipment 
made available for use on or after the beginning of the earliest 
period presented when the entity first applies the amendment.
The amendments are not expected to have a material impact 
on the Bank.
66
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Onerous Contracts – Costs of Fulfilling a Contract – Amendments 
to IAS 37
In May 2020, the IASB issued amendments to IAS 37 to specify which 
costs an entity needs to include when assessing whether a contract is 
onerous or loss-making.
The amendments apply a “directly related cost approach” . The costs 
that relate directly to a contract to provide goods or services include 
both incremental costs and an allocation of costs directly related to 
contract activities. General and administrative costs do not relate 
directly to a contract and are excluded unless they are explicitly 
chargeable to the counterparty under the contract.
The amendments are effective for annual reporting periods beginning 
on or after 1 January 2022. The Bank will apply these amendments 
to contracts for which it has not yet fulfilled all its obligations at the 
beginning of the annual reporting period in which it first applies the 
amendments.
67
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC5. Interest income 
Placement 16,565,661 19,243,543
Investments securities   95,664,661      45,302,861  
Loans and advances    398,762,607      454,916,975 
     510,992,929        519,463,379  
Interest income recognition was based on the effective interest rate (EIR).
6. Interest and similar expense 
Savings accounts    39,024,090      35,322,870  
Current accounts   586,060     774,428  
Term deposits  52,470,259     64,649,461  
Borrowings  17,910,008     13,504,652  
   109,990,417     114,251,411  
Interest expense recognition was based on the effective interest rate (EIR).
7. Fees and commission income  2021    2020 
  GH¢    GH¢ 
Domestic operations  62,985,482     66,764,395  
Cards operations 14,489,734    10,383,711  
 77,475,216   77,148,106   
Fees and commission income was earned at a point in time    
   
8. Fees and commission expense   2021   2020  
 GH¢   GH¢ 
Cards operations  24,411,185    20,908,369  
Cheque books  283,355     245,062  
Cash collection  2,557,668     1,693,778  
   27,252,208     22,847,209  
Fees and commission expenses were incurred at a point in time
9. Net trading revenue    
Forex trading gains  160,227,667     148,253,870  
Forex trading losses  (119,434,315)   (106,593,626)
 40,793,352   41,660,244  Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
2021    
GH¢     2020 
  GH¢
2021
GH¢2020
GH¢2021 
 GH 2020 
 GH¢
68
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC10. Net income from other financial instruments carried at fair value   
Gain from swap  32,561,315     37,772,649  
Margin on bond trading  20,302,059     14,948,032  
Fair value on equity instruments (Note 19a)  (27,729)   (303,265) 
   52,835,645     52,417,416  
11. Other operating income/expense
Exchange loss    (1,320,467)   (5,086,460) 
Rent/hiring fees  39,960     76,708  
Postages  94,351     61,402  
Dividend received from investment -   133,640    
Miscellaneous and others*   92,625,692      169,838  
     91,439,536     (4,644,872)
*Included in this amount is a figure of GH ¢92,477,629 being prior year provision reversals.  The provisions relate to Group technological service fees which were 
reversed following regulatory approvals and authorized payment limits.
12. Net impairment loss on financial assets   
Specific impairment   33,976,556      57,825,973  
Portfolio  impairment   8,450,423     (5,806,425) 
 Total impairment    42,426,979        52,019,548   
Recoveries  (9,019,398)   (18,669,974)
Net impairment    33,407,581       33,349,574  
 
12a. Total impairment
Cash and cash equivalents (Note 17c)  243,616     113,319  
Investment securites   208,198     503,932    
Loans and advances (Note 20f)   30,474,332    51,884,527  
Lcs and guarantees ( off balance sheet liabilities) (Note 32b)  (2,287,247)   (482,230)
Equity Investment 9,285,350 -
Other financial assets 4,502,730
    42,426,979     52,019,548  
*Included in the expected credit loss for loans and advances is an amount of GH¢3,540,476  in respect of loans written off in the current year.
13. Personnel expenses     
     
Salaries, bonuses and staff allowances   108,047,866      100,671,892  
Social security fund contribution   7,117,426     6,553,859  
Provident fund contribution  5,602,865     5,031,328  
Medicals  4,635,152     4,440,712  
Insurance  860,677     793,309  
Termination expenses  3,918,729    4,608,554    
Training  539,124     262,664 
Other employee costs  1,214,738     3,135,173  
Directors emoluments (Note 13a)  3,580,290     3,194,354  
   135,516,867     128,691,845  Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
2021
GH¢2020
GH¢
2021    
GH¢  
2021    
GH¢  
2021    
GH¢  
2021    
GH¢    2020 
  GH¢
  2020 
  GH¢
  2020 
  GH¢
  2020 
  GH¢
69
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCThe average number of persons employed by the Bank during the year was   537  (2020: 562).
The Bank contributes to a three-tier defined contribution plan. The employee pays 5.5% and the Bank pays 13% making a 
total of 18.5%. The Bank transfers 13.5% to the first tier , 5% to a privately managed and mandatory second tier for lump 
sum benefit . The third tier is a voluntary provident fund and personal pension scheme to which the Bank contributes 10% 
of staff basic salary.
13a. Directors emoluments   2021  2020  
 GH¢    GH¢
Directors salaries and allowances    2,628,396      2,391,327  
Directors expenses   134,027      187,365  
Directors fees  817,867     615,662  
   3,580,290      3,194,354  
14. Other operating expenses  2021   2020  
 GH¢    GH¢ 
Donations  442,883     1,281,617  
Advertising and marketing  4,509,393     2,091,360  
Office expenses (Note 14a)  39,250,437     42,650,604 
Administrative expenses  8,795,286     7,179,894  
General expenses  (Note 14b)   97,597,308      78,482,560  
   150,595,307      131,686,035  
14a. Office expenses   2021  2020  
 GH¢    GH¢ 
Utilities   6,588,880     6,176,802  
Maintenance of computer software & hardware  11,286,715     13,230,373  
Network  and communication  4,936,948    6,887,939  
Office and computer stationery   948,498     1,600,018  
Repairs to furniture & equipment   2,154,873     1,772,071  
Resource hiring    5,880,750     4,972,948  
Other  office expenses  7,453,773     8,010,453  
  39,250,437   42,650,604  
14b. General expenses 2021   2020  
 GH¢    GH¢
Professional  fees and charges    3,389,445     4,868,460  
Repairs and rental of equipment  2,655,211     1,786,031  
It and  support services  63,350,166    43,674,912  
Other general expenses  28,202,486     28,153,157  
  97,597,308     78,482,560  Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
70
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC14c. Auditors’ remuneration  2021   2020  
 GH¢    GH¢  
 Statutory audit  613,813    555,040  
Auditors’ remuneration in relation to statutory audit amounted to  GH¢  613,813  (2020 : GH¢ 555,040).  
15. Income tax expense  2021    2020 
GH¢    GH¢   GH¢
Corporate tax (24a)     (83,513,629)  (71,823,122)
Deferred tax (15b)      11,528,917         15,483,504 
National stabilization levy (15c)    (14,098,333)  (11,081,502)
Financial sector recovery levy (15d)     (11,554,021) -
Charge to statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income    (97,637,066)  (67,421,120)
15a. Corporate & deferred tax 2021  2020  
 GH¢    GH¢
Analysis of charge for the year  
Corporate tax (24a)    (83,513,629)  (71,823,122)
Deferred tax (15b)    11,528,917       15,483,504 
     (71,984,712)  (56,339,618)
The corporate tax charge on the profit is based on Ghana’s corporate tax rate of 25% (2020:25%).
 2021    2020  
 GH¢    GH¢
15b. Deferred tax  
 Balance as at 1 january   15,309,433     271,230 
Tax expense recognised in profit or loss during the year     11,528,917        15,483,504  
Tax recognised in OCI during the year   172,356  (445,301) 
Balance as at 31 December   27,010,706   15,309,433   
Property, plant and equipment -  (41,223,420)   (41,223,420) -   (41,223,420)   (41,223,420)
Provisions and contingencies      68,507,070       -         68,507,070        56,978,154   -      56,978,154  
FVOCI instrument   -      (272,945)  (272,945) -  (445,301)  (445,301)
Net tax liabilities/(assets)     68,507,070       (41,496,365)     27,010,706       56,978,154     (41,668,721)   15,309,433 Deferred tax assets and liabilities are attributable to the following:
2020 2021
Assets
GH¢Liabilities
GH¢Net
GH¢Assets
GH¢Liabilities
GH¢Net
GH¢Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
71
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC 2021  2020  
 GH¢   GH¢
15c. National stabilization levy  
Analysis of charge for the Year
Charge to statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income     (14,098,333)  (11,081,502)  
 
In accordance with the National Fiscal Stabilization Act, 2013 (Act 862) all companies in Banking, Non Bank Financial Institutions, Insurance, Mining, Brewery 
and Communication are supposed to pay a levy of 5% of profit before tax towards National Fiscal Stability . 
  
15d. Financial Sector Recovery Levy 2021 2020
  GH¢ GH¢
  Analysis of charge for the year  
 Charge to statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income    (11,554,021) -
 The Financial Sector Recovery Levy was institituted as a levy on banks to raise revenue to support the financial sector reforms and to provide for related 
matters. Thus , in accordance with the Financial Sector Recovery Levy Act, 2021 (Act 1067) , all Banking Instituitions (excluing rural banks and community 
banks) are required  to pay 5% of profit before tax as a Levy . The Act was gazetted on 31 March,2021.
15e. Factors affecting the corporate tax charged for the year
A reconciliation of the charge that would result from applying the standard Ghana corporate tax rate to profit before tax to 
tax charge for the year is given below:   
 2021  2020  
 GH¢   GH¢
Pretax profit for the year     281,966,699        221,630,035  
Tax charge thereon at Ghana corporate tax rate of 25%     70,491,675        55,407,509  
Factors affecting Charge:  
Non deductible expenses    20,132,453        25,676,460  
Income exempted    (18,639,418)  (24,744,351)
National Stabilisation Levy     14,098,335        11,081,502  
Financial Sector Recovery Levy    11,554,021    -
Tax on corporate profit (Note 15)     97,637,067       67,421,120  
Effective Corporate Income tax rate 34.6% 30.4%
The tax charge on profit for the year is based on Ghana’s corporate tax rate of 25% . A National Stabilisation Levy and a Financial Sector Recovery Levy are also 
both charged at 5% each (2020 : Corporate tax 25%, National Stabilisation Levy 5%).
   
16. Earnings per share
Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the profit after tax for the year attributable to the equity holders of the 
Bank by the weighted average number of shares, held during the year after deducting treasury shares.
The following table shows the income and share data used in the calculation of the basic earnings per share:
   
 2021  2020
Profit attributable to shareholders of the Bank (GH¢)    184,329,633      154,208,915 
Number of Shares  
Weighted Average number of oustanding ordinary shares  709,141,367     709,141,367  
Basic Earning per Share (GH¢)     0.260       0.217  
Diluted Earnings per Share (GH¢)     0.260        0.217 
Diluted Earnings per Share
The Bank has no category of dilutive potential ordinary shares.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
72
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC17. Cash and cash equivalents 2021 2020
  GH¢  GH¢
 
Cash on hand and cash balances with bank of ghana (Note 17a)  681,248,249     640,873,048  
Due from banks and other institutions (Note 17b)  283,381,957    921,536,236  
Gross cash and cash equivalent   964,630,206     1,562,409,284   
Less impairment  (669,284)  (425,668)
  963,960,922     1,561,983,616 
17a. Cash on hand and cash balances with Bank of Ghana    
 2021  2020  
 GH¢   GH¢
Cash on hand  122,795,991     94,416,351  
Balance with Bank of Ghana  558,452,258     546,456,697  
  681,248,249     640,873,048  
17b. Due from banks and other institutions  2021  2020  
 GH¢  GH¢
 
Nostro account balances  182,786,981     902,686,159  
Items in course of collection  10,594,976    18,850,077 
 Placement with local banks 90,000,000 -
  283,381,957     921,536,236 
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to cash and cash equivalents is as follows:
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk based on the Bank’s internal credit rating system and 
year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of impairment allowances.  
2021 (GH¢) Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Individual Individual Individual Individual
Cash and cash equivalents   964,630,206   -     -      964,630,206  
Total  964,630,206    -     -      964,630,206  
2021 (GH¢) Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Individual Individual Individual 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021 1,562,409,284    -     -      1,562,409,284  
New assets originated or purchased 964,630,206    -     -     964,630,206  
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs) (1,562,409,284)  -     -      (1,562,409,284)
Transfers to stage 1  -     -     -     -   
Transfers to stage 2  -     -     -     -   
Transfers to stage 3  -     -     -     -   
Amounts written off  -     -     -     -   
Total 964,630,206    -     -      964,630,206 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
73
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC2020 (GH¢) Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Individual Individual Individual
 
Cash and cash equivalents    1,562,409,284     -     -      1,562,409,284   
Total    1,562,409,284     -     -      1,562,409,284  
2020 (GH¢)  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Individual Individual Individual 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2020 1,295,953,080    -     -     1,295,953,080  
New assets originated or purchased 1,562,409,284    -     -     1,562,409,284  
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)  (1,295,953,080)  -     -     (1,295,953,080)
Transfers to stage 1  -     -     -     -   
Transfers to stage 2  -     -     -     -   
Transfers to stage 3  -     -     -     -   
Amounts written off  -     -     -     -   
Total 1,562,409,284    -     -    1,562,409,284 
 
 2021  2020  
 GH¢   GH¢
17c. Impairment allowance for cash and cash equivalents
Opening balance  425,668     312,349  
Charge for the year   243,616     113,319  
Closing stock of provision  669,284     425,668 
2021 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Individual Individual Individual
ECL allowance as at 1 January 2021 425,668    -     -      425,668 
New assets originated or purchased 669,284    -     -      669,284 
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs) (425,668)  -     -      (425,668)
Transfers to Stage 1  -     -     -     -   
Transfers to Stage 2  -     -     -     -   
Transfers to Stage 3  -     -     -     -   
Amounts written off  -     -     -     -   
Total 669,284    -     -      669,284 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
74
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC2020 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Individual Individual Individual 
ECL allowance as at 1 January 2020 312,349    -     -     312,349   
New assets originated or purchased 425,668    -     -     425,668   
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs) (312,349)  -     -    (312,349)
Transfers to stage 1  -     -     -     -   
Transfers to stage 2  -     -     -     -   
Transfers to stage 3  -     -     -     -   
Amounts written off  -     -     -     -   
Total 425,668    -     -    425,668  
18. Non-pledged trading assets      
   2021  2020  
   GH¢   GH¢
Government bonds     100,845,857     51,322,316  
Treasury bills    42,310,423     16,574,160 
     143,156,280     67,896,476 
18a. Non pledged trading assets  2021 2020 
 FV FV  
 Through P&L    Through P&L  
 GH¢   GH¢ 
Balance as at 1 January   67,896,476     57,523,936  
Additions  142,657,354     68,612,759  
Disposals   (67,896,476)   (57,523,936)
Fair value    498,926    (716,283) 
Balance as at 31 December  143,156,280     67,896,476  
None of the financial instruments was pledged as collateral during the year (2020: Nil).   
19. Equity investments   2021  2020  
  GH¢   GH¢
Advans Ghana (Note 19a)   2,923,386     2,951,115
YUP Ghana    9,285,350        9,285,350 
Impairment  (9,285,350) -
Total     2,923,386      12,236,465  
 2021  2020  
 GH¢  GH¢
19a. Advans Ghana
Balance as at 1 January  2,951,115     3,254,380  
Fair value  (27,729)   (303,265) 
  2,923,386     2,951,115 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
75
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCAdvans Ghana is a Savings and Loans company which 
specializes in the collection of deposits and giving of 
credits. Societe Generale Ghana has a 6.22% (previously 
10%) stake in the ownership of the company. It is an 
unlisted equity investment which is carried at fair value 
through profit or loss.   
YUP Ghana Limited, has been incorporated as a private 
company limited by shares. The Company was registered 
with 500,000,000 shares of no-par value. The e company 
is authorized to carry on  the distribution of electronicmoney. SG Ghana held a 35.6% interest in YUP Ghana 
Limited and recognised its investment using the equity 
method. At year end, management has determined 
that there is objective evidence that the investment is 
impaired. Thus, SG Ghana has calculated the amount of 
impairment as the difference between the carrying value 
and its recoverable amount and has been recognised in 
the statement of profit or loss.
Advans Ghana will be held under our investment 
company SSBI.
 2021  2020  
 GH¢   GH¢
20. Loans and advances
Overdrafts   501,743,477     534,694,886  
Term loans   2,115,073,457     2,114,641,416  
Export financing -    413,136  
Staff loan    71,006,599      68,657,097  
Equipment finance lease     117,035,204      107,362,816  
Gross loans and advances  (Note 20d)    2,804,858,737      2,825,769,351  
Amortised cost adjustment    (28,390,451)   (28,334,030)
Interest in suspense   (37,956,512)   (24,898,406)
Less:  allowances for impairment  (Note 20e)    (234,145,097)   (209,830,240)
    2,504,366,677       2,562,706,675 
 2021  2020  
 GH¢  GH¢
Loans and advances
Current   2,497,536,711     2,596,040,746  
Other loans especially mentioned   94,735,487     39,977,578  
Gross performing loans    2,592,272,198      2,636,018,324  
Substandard   15,406,958     26,654,272  
Doubtful   17,803,061     35,124,623  
Loss  179,376,520     127,972,132  
Gross non performing loans  212,586,539     189,751,027  
Total gross loans  2,804,858,737      2,825,769,351  Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
76
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC 2021  2020
 GH¢ GH¢
20a. Other statistics
i. Loan loss provision ratio 8.35% 7.43%
ii. Gross non-performing loan ratio 7.58% 6.72%
iii. 50 Largest exposure (gross funded loan and advances to total exposure) 62.02% 65.50%
iv. Liquidity ratio  108.78% 88.26%
v. Leverage ratio 12.57% 12.59%
vi. Off-balance sheet exposures (GH¢m)    1,079.86      665.07 
 
 2021 2020  
 GH¢  GH¢
20b. Analysis by type of customers
Individual   920,323,902      833,960,192  
Private enterprise    1,442,944,151      1,486,476,662  
Public enterprise  137,511,614     219,946,201  
Government departments and agencies    233,072,471      219,528,425  
Staff   71,006,599     65,857,871  
   2,804,858,737      2,825,769,351 
 
 2021 2020  
 GH¢  GH¢
20c. Analysis by industry sector
Agriculture, forestry and fishing   296,962,528     340,659,130  
Mining and quarrying  60,219,929     52,316,025  
Manufacturing   287,030,719     267,007,161  
Construction   11,591,330     8,762,270  
Electricity, gas and water   201,165,848     148,531,412  
Commerce and finance   160,187,200     232,869,730  
Transport, storage, communication and services    1,681,177,356     1,681,204,549  
Miscellaneous    106,523,827      94,419,074  
    2,804,858,737      2,825,769,351 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
77
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC20d. Analysis of gross loans and advances
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk based on year-end stage classification. 
The amounts presented are gross of impairment allowances.   
2021 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Corporate lending 1,697,959,024     13,056,542        83,035,000     1,794,050,566   
Retail lending  830,595,666      86,483,505     93,729,000      1,010,808,171   
Gross loan balance   2,528,554,690       99,540,047     176,764,000      2,804,858,737   
2020 GH¢   Stage 1   Stage 2   Stage 3   Total 
 Collective   Collective   Specific 
 
Corporate lending   1,772,289,664     21,162,854     95,749,138     1,889,201,656  
Retail lending   810,431,147     26,798,374     99,338,174     936,567,695  
Gross loan balance    2,582,720,811     47,961,228     195,087,312     2,825,769,351 
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount  in relation to corporate lending is as follows:
2021 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021   1,772,289,664     21,162,854     95,749,138     1,889,201,656  
New assets originated or purchased    519,690,552      13,056,542     59,903,353      592,650,447   
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)   (594,021,046)   (21,162,854)    (72,532,800)    (687,716,700)
Transfers to stage 1   8,358,206    (1,922,524)  (6,435,681)  -   
Transfers to stage 2   (17,683,397)   19,791,250     (2,107,853)     -   
Transfers to stage 3   (1,567,995)  -   1,567,995    -   
Amounts written off   (146)  -   (84,691)  (84,837)
Total   1,687,065,838      30,925,268       76,059,461      1,794,050,566  
2020 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2020   1,844,755,709     19,681,318     187,753,968     2,052,190,995  
New assets originated or purchased   717,863,282     7,410,523     39,859,443     765,133,248  
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)   (769,497,290)   (8,166,564)  (62,636,601)   (840,300,455)
Transfers to stage 1   (1,362,818)     1,362,818  -  -   
Transfers to stage 2   (8,097,578)   8,097,578    -     -   
Transfers to stage 3  (11,206,974)   (7,220,058)  18,427,032    -   
Amounts written off  (164,667)     (2,761)   (87,654,704)   (87,822,132)
Total   1,772,289,664     21,162,854     95,749,138     1,889,201,656 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
78
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCAn analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to Retail lending is as follows: 
2021 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021   810,431,147     26,798,374     99,338,174    936,567,695  
New assets originated or purchased   445,952,240    82,270,300     31,209,774     559,432,314  
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)    (425,771,817)   (22,582,680)    (33,199,487)   (481,553,985)
Transfers to stage 1   83,111,791     (66,252,813)   (16,858,978)  -   
Transfers to stage 2   5,041,919   3,180,597     (8,222,516)  -   
Transfers to stage 3  (987,568)   (1,524)   989,091    -   
Amounts written off  (15,904)   (2,489)   (3,619,461)  (3,637,853)
Total 917,761,808    23,409,766   69,636,597    1,010,808,171 
2020 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Collective Collective Specific  
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2020   793,870,926     22,479,741     75,884,126     892,234,793 
New assets originated or purchased  368,034,220     5,653,156    15,732,333     389,419,709  
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)   (318,826,936)   (8,585,486)  (9,490,791)  (286,215,796)
Transfers to stage 1   6,220,797     (5,323,516)  (897,281)  -   
Transfers to stage 2   (19,411,236)   19,411,236    -     -   
Transfers to stage 3   (19,455,240)   (6,836,102)   26,291,342    -   
Amounts written off  (1,384)  (655)   (8,181,555)   (8,183,594)
Total 810,431,147   26,798,374   99,338,174   936,567,695 
20e. Analysis of impairment allowances
2021 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Corporate lending 42,614,504    2,245,725   78,138,550      122,998,780   
Retail lending 9,669,593   21,677,795   79,798,929     111,146,317   
Gross loan balance  52,284,097    23,923,521   157,937,479      234,145,097  
2020 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Corporate lending 46,324,999   3,886,871   77,989,000     128,200,870  
Retail lending 9,079,967   6,629,403   65,920,000     81,629,370  
Gross loan balance  55,404,966   10,516,274   143,909,000    209,830,240 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
79
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC20f. Analysis of impairment allowances
 2021  2020  
  GH¢  GH¢
At 1 January   209,830,240        253,990,687  
Loans written off during the year     (2,619,000)     (90,427,001)
   207,211,240      163,563,686  
Increase in provision     26,933,857          46,266,554 
At 31 December 234,145,097      209,830,240   
Impairment allowance for loans and advances to corporate customers
2021 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021 46,324,999   3,886,871    77,989,000     128,200,870 
New assets originated or purchased 13,511,954   2,245,725    6,964,000     22,721,680  
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs) (17,222,449) (3,886,871) (6,729,450)    (27,838,770)
Transfers to stage 1 217,313  (49,986)  (167,328)  -   
Transfers to stage 2 (3,041,544) 3,404,095    (362,551)     -   
Transfers to stage 3 - -    -   
Amounts written off -  -  (85,000)   (85,000)
Total 39,790,273    5,599,835   77,608,672     122,998,780  
2020 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2020 58,137,922   1,075,166   131,541,839   190,754,927  
New assets originated or purchased 18,648,333   4,216,353   3,658,600   59,450,686  
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs) (29,575,483) (1,130,862) (3,414,391) (34,120,736)
Transfers to stage 1 224,868   (224,868) (2,742,138) - 
Transfers to stage 2 (242,927) 242,927   - - 
Transfers to stage 3 (417,978) (741,581) 1,159,559   - 
Amounts written off -  -  (87,884,007) (87,884,007)
Total 46,324,999   3,886,871   77,989,000   128,200,870 
Impairment allowance for loans and advances to retail customers
2021 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021   9,079,967    6,629,403     65,920,000    81,629,370  
New assets originated or purchased   4,985,972     20,489,005     23,831,929    49,306,906  
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)  (4,396,346)  (5,440,612)    (7,419,000)   (17,255,959)
Transfers to stage 1  847,289     (668,573)  (178,715)  -   
Transfers to stage 2   1,290,107  754,723   2,044,830      -   
Transfers to stage 3  -  -  -   -   
Amounts written off  -     -     (2,534,000)   (2,534,000)
Total 11,806,989    21,763,945    77,575,384      111,146,317  Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
80
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC2020 GH¢    
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2020   10,471,882    2,635,519    50,128,358     63,235,759  
New assets originated or purchased  4,508,296     6,167,443     25,765,000     36,440,739  
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)   (7,481,723)   498,953    (8,521,358)   (15,504,128)
Transfers to stage 1   2,010,756    (1,292,931)   (717,825)  -   
Transfers to stage 2  (218,975)  218,975    -     -   
Transfers to stage 3  (210,269)  (1,598,556)  1,808,825    -   
Amounts written off  -     -      (2,543,000)  (2,543,000)
Total 9,079,967   6,629,403   65,920,000   81,629,370 
Loan provisioning/impairment are carried out in accordance with Bank of Ghana Policy as well as the principles of IFRS. Loan impairment 
losses calculated based on IFRS principles are passed through the statement of comprehensive income. Where credit loss provisions per 
IFRS principles is more than provisions per  Bank of Ghana guidelines, no regulatory credit reserve is required.
When the credit loss provision calculated under IFRS principles is less than what is required under the Bank of Ghana guidelines, transfers 
are made from the income surplus account into the non- distributable regulatory credit reserves.  
   2021  2020  
   GH¢   GH¢
Provisions per Bank of Ghana guidelines     185,168,207      157,495,753  
Provisions per IFRS     234,145,097      209,830,240  
No credit risk reserve was made in 2021 and 2020 as IFRS provision is greater than provision under Bank of Ghana 
guidelines.
21. Investment securities                    2021                2020
Debt instruments measured at amortised cost    1,383,955,004      427,587,822  
Debt instruments measured at Fair value through OCI    87,240,744    108,961,776    
    1,471,195,749      536,549,598  
 Debt instruments 
measured at 
amortised cost21a. Debt instruments 
measured at Fair value 
through OCIDebt instruments 
measured at 
amortised costDebt instruments 
measured at Fair value 
through OCI  
 GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢ 
Cost   1,384,667,134     86,148,964     428,091,754     107,180,571    
Fair value     1,091,781    -     1,781,205 
Less impairment  (712,130)  -      (503,932)     -
  1,383,955,004     87,240,744     427,587,822   108,961,776 
Lien on investment securities
Included in debt instruments measured at amortised cost is an amount of GH¢20million placed with the Bank of Ghana (BoG) by Societe 
Generale Ghana PLC as integrity capital as part of the requirement for a Dedicated Electronic Money Issuer (DEMI) licence for YUP Ghana,an 
associated company of Societe Generale Ghana Plc. The said amount has been invested by the Bank of Ghana (BoG) in a 5 year Bond 
bearing an interest of 21.5% per annum and is expected to mature in March 2025. The aforementioned and its accrued interest ( GH¢ 7.73M 
as at December 2021) is a regulatory requirement and may only be made available to Societe Generale Ghana PLC in the instances where 
the licence is cancelled,expired or revoked and after all the liabilities held by YUP Ghana Limited has been settled.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
81
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCDebt instruments measured at amortised cost
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk and year-end stage classification. The amounts 
presented is net of impairment allowances.
 2021  GH¢
 Stage 1       Stage 2                        Stage 3                            Total 
                                                                                  Collective Collective Specific  
Government Bills and Bonds                1,383,955,004                                               -                                               -     1,383,955,004  
Total exposure                                        1,383,955,004                                              -                                              -     1,383,955,004  
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount and year-end stage classification is, as follows:
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2020 428,091,754    -     -      428,091,754  
New assets originated or purchased 1,057,882,493     -     -     1,057,882,443  
Assets derecognised or matured (excluding write offs) (101,307,113)  -     -     (101,307,113)
Transfers to stage 1  -     -     -     -   
Transfers to stage 2  -     -     -     -   
Transfers to stage 3  -     -     -     -   
Amounts written off  -     -     -     -   
Total     1,384,667,134     -     -      1,384,667,134 
21b. Impairment allowance for Debt Instruments at Amortized Cost  2021 2020
    GH¢ GH¢ 
Opening balance                                           503,932                                             -
Charge for the year                                           208,198                              503,932
Closing stock of provision                                           712,130                            503,932 
2021 GH¢
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
ECL allowance as at 1 January 2021  503,932      -     -     503,932    
New assets originated or purchased 327452  -     -     327452 
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs) (119,255)    -     -    (119,255)    
Transfers to stage 1  -     -     -     -   
Transfers to stage 2  -     -     -     -   
Transfers to stage 3  -     -     -     -   
Amounts written off  -     -     -     -   
Total  712,130   -     -      712,130 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
82
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC2020 GH¢    
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Individual Individual Individual
 
Government bills and bonds 427,587,822    -     -    427,587,822  
Total exposure  427,587,822    -     -    427,587,822 Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount and year-end stage classification is, as follows:
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Individual Individual Collective 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2020 83,104,992     -     -    83,104,992  
New assets originated or purchased 437,842,702    -     -    437,842,702  
Assets derecognised or matured (excluding write offs) (92,855,940)  -     -    (92,855,940)
Transfers to stage 1  -     -     -    - 
Transfers to stage 2  -     -     -    - 
Transfers to stage 3  -     -     -    - 
Amounts written off  -     -     -    - 
Total   428,091,754    -     -      428,091,754 
Impairment allowance for debt instruments measured at amortised cost
22. Property, plant and equipment  
   2021 2020  
    GH¢  GH¢
Property, plant and equipment (22b)     255,268,418     290,748,100  
     255,268,418    290,748,100                                         
2020 GH¢
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Individual Individual Individual 
ECL allowance as at 1 January 2020  -      -     -     -    
New assets originated or purchased  (503,932)   -     -     (503,932) 
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs) -     -     -    -   
Transfers to stage 1  -     -     -     -   
Transfers to stage 2  -     -     -     -   
Transfers to stage 3  -     -     -     -   
Amounts written off  -     -     -     -   
Total  (503,932)   -     -      (503,932) 
83
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC Land &  
 Building 
 Land &  
 Building 2021  GH¢
2020 GH¢ Right  of  Use  
 Assets  
 Right  of  Use  
 Assets   Computers
 Computers Furniture & 
 Equipment 
 Furniture & 
 Equipment   Motor 
 Vehicles 
  Motor 
 Vehicles    Assets in  
 Course of 
 Construction 
   Assets in  
 Course of 
 Construction    Total
   TotalNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d    
22a. Depreciation and amortization      
   2021 2020  
   GH¢   GH¢ 
Property, plant and equipment (Note 22b)     30,463,364     32,459,174  
Intangible assets (Note 23)     4,344,234     1,128,990  
     34,807,598     33,588,164 
22b. Depreciation and amortization
Cost/valuation  GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Balance at 1 January    81,063,823     217,114,235     22,816,602     52,092,312     8,975,095    37,248,483    419,310,550 
Additions   117,254     3,277,747    2,185,520     1,288,335    -    3,108,041    9,976,898 
Transfers  2,145,810     1,916,523    1,336,494      9,426,358      -     (14,825,184) -
Reclassification       (14,993,214) (14,993,214)
Write offs  -     -     -     -     (77,043)  -  (77,043)
 Disposal -   -   -   -   - -
Balance as at 31 December   83,326,887     222,308,505     26,338,617     62,807,004     8,898,052     10,538,126      414,217,191  
Depreciation
Balance at 1 January   28,280,704    32,786,662     21,102,781     38,629,549     7,762,755    -   128,562,451  
Charge for the year     6,423,825    16,177,253     1,395,521     5,639,193     827,572    -   30,463,364  
Transfers  -   -   -     -     -     -  -   
Disposal  -     -     -     -      (77,043)     -   (77,043)   
Balance as at 31 December 34,704,529 48,963,915 22,498,302 44,268,742 8,513,284 - 158,948,773
NBV as at 31 December 2021 48,622,358 173,344,590 3,840,314 18,538,262 384,768 10,538,126 255,268,418
Cost/valuation  GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Balance at 1 January   79,832,821     203,966,119     21,868,925     49,743,300    8,621,695     22,939,034    386,971,894  
Additions   184,493     13,108,407     947,679     1,736,399     353,400     16,011,855    32,342,233  
Transfers    1,046,506    39,709    -     612,615     -      (1,698,830)  -   
Write offs  -     -     -     -     -      (3,577)   (3,577)
Disposal - - - - - - -
Balance as at 31 December  81,063,820      217,114,235      22,816,604     52,092,314     8,975,095     37,248,482    419,310,550  
84
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
 Land &  
 Building 2020  Right  of  Use  
 Assets   Computers  Furniture & 
 Equipment   Motor 
 Vehicles    Assets in  
 Course of 
 Construction    Total
Depreciation  GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢ GH¢
Balance at 1 January    22,482,411      15,027,290     19,966,852    32,597,788     6,028,935    -   96,103,276 
Charge for the year   6,862,604      16,695,061    1,135,928     6,031,760     1,733,821   -   32,459,174 
Transfers    (1,064,311)    1,064,311   -     -     -     -  -   
Disposal  -     -     -     -     -     -  -   
Balance as at 31 December 28,280,704  32,786,662   21,102,780   38,629,548   7,762,756  -  128,562,450 
NBV as at 31 December 2020 52,783,116  184,327,573   1,713,824   13,462,766   1,212,339   37,248,482   290,748,100 
23. Intangible assets
 2021  2020  
  GH¢   GH¢
Computer software
Cost
Balance as at 1 January   21,866,496     21,201,601  
Additions  3,096,343     664,895 
Reclassification (Note 22b)  14,993,214      - 
Balance as at 31 December   39,956,054     21,866,496  
Amortisation
Balance as at 1 January   20,602,025     19,473,036 
Charge for the year   4,344,234     1,128,990  
Balance as at 31 December  24,946,260     20,602,026 
  31 December   15,009,794     1,264,470 
The amortization periods and key factors considered in determining the useful life are the same as disclosed in note 2.8 
above.
24. Corporate Tax:  assets/liabilities  
 2021  2020  
 GH¢   GH¢ 
Corporate tax (note 24a)     (22,731,274)  (24,680,582)
National stabilization levy (Note 24b)    1,559,711      (1,071,942)
Financial sector recovery levy (Note 24c)    (153,621) -
   (21,325,184)    (25,752,524)
85
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
24a. Corporate tax
 2021  2020  
  GH¢   GH¢
Balance as at 1 January   (24,680,582)   (35,602,172) 
Charge to statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income    (83,513,629)   (71,823,122)
Payment/credit during the year   85,462,937      82,744,712  
Balance as at 31 December     (22,731,274)    (24,680,582)
24b. National stabilization levy  
 2021  2020  
 GH¢   GH¢
Balance as at 1 January   (1,071,942)   (149,158) 
Charge to statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income    (14,098,333)   (11,081,502)
Payment/credit during the year    16,729,986      10,158,718  
Balance as at 31 December     1,559,711       (1,071,942)
The levy charged on the profit is based on a rate of 5% .
In accordance with the National Fiscal Stabilization Act, 2013, (Act 862) all companies in Banking, Non Bank Financial Institutions, 
Insurance, Mining, Brewery and Communication are supposed to pay a levy of 5% of profit before tax towards National Fiscal Stability.
 
24c. Financial sector recovery levy  
 2021  2020  
 GH¢   GH¢
Balance as at 1 January  - - 
Charge to statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income      (11,554,021)  -
Payment/credit during the year   11,400,401     -  
Balance as at 31 December       (153,621)   -
The levy charged on the profit is based on a rate of 5%.
The Financial Sector Recovery Levy was institituted as a levy on banks to raise revenue to support the financial sector reforms and to provide 
for related matters. Thus , In accordance with the Financial Sector Recovery Levy Act, 2021 (Act 1067), all Banking Instituitions (excluding rural 
banks and community banks) are required  to pay 5% of profit before tax as a Levy. The Act was gazetted on 31 March 2021.
25. Other assets  2021  2020  
  GH¢  GH¢
Stationery and consumable stocks  49,626     151,806  
Prepayments and sundry debtors (Note 25a)     53,995,388        66,308,069  
Accrued income  85,173    51,644 
      54,130,187        66,511,519 
86
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
25a.     Prepayments and sundry debtors
  GH¢  GH¢
Finance lease prepayment  3,094,407     1,343,217  
Unpaid customer charges     8,899,518      6,569,231  
Deferred staff cost   13,110,105     14,209,047  
Rent prepayment   285,788     536,954 
Medical prepayment   3,134,072    3,070,767  
Bills payment  -    3,590,921  
Other sundry debtors and prepayment*      25,471,498        36,987,932  
      53,995,388        66,308,069 
 * Included in sundry debtors and prepayment is an amount of GH¢12,648,119 due from YUP Ghana (A company for which SG Ghana holds 35.6% interest). 
At year end, management has determined that there is objective evidence that the receivable  is impaired. Thus, SG Ghana has calculated the amount of 
impairment of loss of GH¢4,502,730 as the difference between the carrying amount and the recoverable value and has recognised the loss within in the 
statement of profit or loss.
26. Derivative liabilities  held for risk management   2021   2020  
  GH¢  GH¢
Fx swap   40,509,648    -
   40,509,648  -
Derivative Financial Instruments
The table below shows the fair values of derivative financial instruments recorded as assets or liabilities together with their 
notional amounts. The notional amount, recorded gross, is the amount of a derivative’s underlying asset, reference rate 
or index and is the basis upon which changes in the value of derivatives are measured. The notional amounts indicate the 
volume of transactions outstanding at the year end and are indicative of neither the market risk nor the credit risk.
Most of the Bank’s derivative trading activities relate to deals with customers that are normally offset by transactions with 
other counterparties. The Bank may also take positions with the expectation of profiting from favourable movements in 
prices, rates or indices.
The derivatives of the bank are fair valued at level 2 using the discounted cash flow method. Future cash flows are estimated 
based on forward exchange rates (from observable forward exchange rate at the end of the reporting period) and contract 
forward rates, discounted at a rate that reflects the credit risk of various counterparties.Fair value of 
derivatives
held for
tradingFair value of 
derivatives
held for
trading2021 2020 Notional 
amountNotional 
amount
  GH¢   GH¢ 
   
Foreign Exchange SWAP -  -      GH¢   GH¢ 
   
Foreign Exchange SWAP  40,509,648    575,730,000    
87
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
27. Borrowings   2021   2020  
  GH¢  GH¢
Socgen borrowing   422,616,338     318,912,566  
European international bank   16,748,123     22,480,716  
Proparco   17,163,281     24,873,505  
IFC   132,336,887       -    
   588,864,628     366,266,787 
Socgen
BorrowingEuropean
International 
BankPropaco IFC   Total
    GH¢                                    GH¢                                GH¢                                 GH¢    GH¢ 
Opening Balance                      318,912,566               22,480,716        24,873,505                   -            366,266,787
Movements within the year:
Cash movements                      103,616,000               (5,659,995)        (7,654,800)           131,383,438           221,684,643 
Non cash movements                         87,772                (72,598)        (55,424)                  953,450                   913,199
Closing bBalance                   422,616,338              16,748,123        17,163,281         132,336,887         588,864,628 
The Bank has not had any defaults of principal, interest or other breaches with regard to any liabilities during 2021 or 2020.                  
Societe de Promotion et de Participation pour la 
Cooperation Economique (PROPARCO):   TThis is a 
US$30million long-term credit line (‘the facility’) granted 
to the bank. The first draw down of USD 6million has a 
fixed interest rate of 5.12% and  matured on 30 April 
2020. The second draw down of US$ 4million has a fixed 
interest rate of 5.19% and  matured on 30 April 2020. The 
third draw down was EUR7.5million.  The related interest 
rate is 6-months Libor plus a margin of 370 basis points 
and will mature on 30  April  2024.  As at 31 December  
2021  the amount outstanding is €2.5million.
European Investment Bank (EIB):  This is a €20million 
credit facility extended to the bank by EIB. The loan could 
be drawn in EUR and/or USD and to be used to finance 
up to 50% of the banks capital expenditure intended 
to develop the bank’s intermediation capacities (such 
as developing its branch network, IT Systems, training 
etc.) and for financing eligible Private Sector Small and 
Medium Sized Enterprises. The interest rate on the drawn 
portion is fixed at 5.422% and matures on 1 April 2024.  As 
at  31 December  2021 the outstanding balance is 
US$2.75million.SocGen Borrowing:  The bank took two facilitities from 
the group.  The first one  is a  US$65.8million renewabIe 
1 year credit line. The second  is a 7 year loan facility  of 
US$55million at Libor 3-months  plus a margin of 376 
basis points and will mature in 4 May  2027.  As at 31 
December 2021  the total  amount outstanding on both 
facilities  was  US$70million.
International Finance Corporation (IFC): This is a 5 year 
US$50m facility granted to support funding in the SME 
business space. The first draw down  of  US$25million was 
done on 24 June 2021 at a rate of 3 month Libor plus a 
spread of 227 basis point. As at 31 December 2021, total 
amount outstanding is   US$21.875million.
88
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
28. Deposit from customers
  2021  2020
  GH¢  GH¢
Retail customers    
   
Term deposits   441,267,773     436,274,367  
Current deposits    839,164,957      818,411,367  
Savings deposits    567,775,555      524,037,991 
Corporate customers 
Term deposits   119,142,367      224,964,145  
Current deposits    1,422,000,000      1,475,797,067  
Savings deposits    1,790,031     1,858,384  
Interest payable on deposits 
Deposits from customers    3,391,140,683      3,481,343,321  
Deposits from banks   1,916,501     3,945,938  
    3,393,057,184      3,485,289,259 
28a. Analysis by type of deposits   2021  2020  
 GH¢  GH¢
Financial institutions   16,357,750     48,601,920  
Individuals and other private enterprise    3,340,670,661      3,422,906,822  
Government departments and agencies   3,189,699     2,858,513  
Public enterprises   32,839,074    10,922,004 
    3,393,057,184      3,485,289,259  
20 Largest depositors to total deposit ratio 23.38%  24.30%
29. Other liabilities
  2021  2020
  GH¢  GH¢
Creditors    44,593,839      32,841,345  
Other creditors and provisions (Note 29a)   190,609,987      88,753,380  
Accruals (Note 29b)    129,496,312     190,708,168  
   364,700,139        312,302,893 
89
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
29a. Other creditors and provisions
  2021   2019
  GH¢  GH¢
Payment orders   6,886,659     7,394,104  
Statutory deductions   3,488,010     2,406,032  
Uncleared effects (Note 29c)    124,298,103      58,379,042  
Other commitments & credit balances   14,162,296      9,444,919  
Staff related provisions  (Note 29d)   2,600,000    2,537,000    
Provisions on contingencies   1,540,029     3,827,276  
Bills payment  16,144,722    - 
Other provisions (Note 29d) 21,490,169 4,765,007
    190,609,987      88,753,380 
29b. Accruals
  2021   2020
  GH¢  GH¢
Staff  &  related  accruals     7,694,177     5,868,608   
Audit fees   751,980     229,267  
Software maintenance    24,354,864     78,086,122  
 IT , marketing  &  other shared services    86,019,571     67,812,265  
Other  accruals   10,675,720      38,711,906  
  129,496,312      190,708,168 
29c. Uncleared effects  
This comprises uncleared balances on customer cheques and balances on customer transit accounts pending onward 
transfers.    
Aging analysis of uncleared effects        2021 2021 2021 2021 
  Below 3  3 to 6   6 to 12  Above 1
 Total months  months   months  year
 GH¢ GH¢  GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
 Uncleared effects    124,298,103       89,752,751         17,480,237       6,537,951       10,527,164   
  2020 2020  2020 2020  
  Below 3  3 to 6   6 to 12  Above 1
 Total months  months   months  year
 GH¢ GH¢  GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Uncleared effects   58,379,042    55,134,614     896,557     2,263,411     84,460  
90
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
29d. Provisions      
2021  Other Provisions   Staff  Provisions   Total
 GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
As at 1 January 2021  4,765,007     2,537,000       7,302,007  
Provisions made during the year   16,982,413     63,000  17,045,413 
Provisions reversed during the year  (257,251)  -      (257,251)
As at 31  December  2021  21,490,169     2,600,000    24,090,169  
2020
As at 1 January 2020  4,825,103   -      4,825,103 
Provisions made during the year  272,391    2,537,000     2,809,391  
Provisions reversed during the year  (332,487)  -  (332,487)
As at 31 December 2020   4,765,007   2,537,000      7,302,007 
Staff  Provisions: This relates to provisions made for staff reorganization and/or termination .  The provisions made reflect Management’s 
best estimate of the expected outflow in the coming year.
Other Provisions: This relates to provisions for legal cases, registrar services and other incidental business costs.Provision for legal cases 
is the best estimate of claims from legal actions brought against the Bank. A fair assessement by the Bank indicates probable judgement 
against the Bank. Provision for registrar services and incidental business cost relates to  business expenses for which timing and outflow 
is uncertain.
30. Stated capital
  2021   2020 
a. Authorised ordinary shares
Number of ordinary shares of no par value 1,000,000,000   1,000,000,000
   
b. Issued and fully paid ordinary shares  Number   Amount   Number   Amount
  GH¢    GH¢
Issued and fully paid ordinary shares  709,141,367     404,245,427     709,141,367     404,245,427 
31. Dividend declared and paid
  2021  2020  
 GH¢  GH¢
Equity dividend on ordinary shares:
Dividend declared                                                                              80,842,116     31,911,361  
Dividend paid during the year  (80,842,116)  ( 31,911,361)
Balance as at 31 December  -     -   
Dividends are treated as appropriation of profit in the year of approval by shareholders.2021 2020
91
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
During the year the following transactions were performed with related parties:
a. Interest paid and interest received from related parties during the year
 
 Interest Paid  Interest    Interest Paid  Interest 
   Received   Received
  GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Societe Generale borrowing   12,528,079     97,847     10,670,773    137,705 
b. Related party balances at December
Lending to related parties: 
 2021   2020  
  GH¢  GH¢
Officers and employees other than Directors  71,006,599     68,657,096  
Nostro account balances with Societe Generale Group  89,041,751     783,910,594  
c. Loans to Directors 
There were no loans to directors during the period. 
d. Controlling relationship  
Societe Generale Group is related by virtue of its ultimate (100%) controlling interest in SG Financial Services Holding, 
which has significant controlling interest in the shareholding in Societe Generale Ghana PLC. 
33. Commitments and Contingent Liabilities
33a. Breakdown of Commitments and Contingent Liabilities  
 2021  2020
 GH¢   GH¢
Guarantees and indemnities  24,384,146    195,746,677  
Letters of credit & others  178,601,059     126,073,791  
Other undrawn commitments  58,162,811     70,176,925  
Spot and forward purchase  818,711,895     273,673,892  
   1,079,859,911   665,671,285  2021 2020
To meet the financial needs of customers, the Bank enters 
into various irrevocable commitments and contingent  
liabilities. These consist of financial guarantees, letters of 
credit and other commitments to lend. Even though these 
obligations may not be recognised on the statement of 
financial position, they contain credit risk and, therefore, 
form part of the overall risk of the Bank.
Letters of credit and guarantees (including standby letters 
of credit) commit the Bank to make payments on behalf of 
customers in the event of a specific act, generally related 
to the import or export of goods. Guarantees and standby 
letters of credit carry a similar credit risk to loans. The nominal values of such commitments are listed below.
Impairment losses on guarantees and other 
commitments
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount and 
the corresponding allowance for impairment losses in 
relation to guarantees and other commitments is, as 
follows:
Financial guarantees
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum 
exposure and year-end stage classification.
92
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Financial guarantees 1,079,859,911    -     -         1,079,859,911  
Total outstanding exposure  1,079,859,911    -     -       1,079,859,911  
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount  in relation to contingent liabilities is as follows:
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2020 665,671,285    -     -     665,671,285 
New assets originated or purchased 1,079,859,911    -    - 1,079,859,911 
Assets derecognised or matured (excluding write offs) (665,671,285)  -    -  (665,671,285)
Transfers to stage 1  -     -    -  -   
Transfers to stage 2 -  -     -    -   
Transfers to stage 3 -  -     -     -   
Amounts written off - -  -     -   
Total outstanding exposure 1,079,859,911    -     -       1,079,859,911 
33b. Impairment allowance for contingent liabilities
 2021  2020  
 GH¢   GH¢ 
Opening balance  3,827,276     4,309,506  
Charge for the year  (2,287,247)  (482,230)
Closing stock of provision   1,540,029     3,827,276  
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total
 Collective Collective  Specific
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021.   3,827,276    -     -    3,827,276 
New assets originated or purchased  -     -     -    -
Assets derecognised or matured (excluding write offs)   (2,287,247)  -    -   (2,287,247)
Transfers to stage 1 -  -     -     -
Transfers to stage 2 -  -     -     -
Transfers to stage 3 -  -     -     -
Amounts written off -  -     -     -
At 31 December 2021   1,540,029    -     -      1,540,029 
93
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC34. Legal liability 
Litigation is a common occurrence in the Banking 
industry due to the nature of the business undertaken. 
The Bank has formal controls and policies for managing 
legal claims. Once professional advice has been obtained 
and the amount of loss reasonably estimated, the Bank 
makes adjustments to account for any adverse effects 
which the claims may have on its financial standing. At 
year-end, the Bank had several unresolved legal claims.
Adequate provision has been made for all the relevant 
litigations for which losses may be probable. The 
probable outflow which could result from all such 
litigation, based on the current status of the various 
legal proceedings, is estimated to be no more than  
GH¢4,022,869 while the timing of the outflow is 
uncertain.35. Analysis of financial assets and liabilities
Financial assets and liabilities are measured on an on-
going basis either at fair value or at amortized cost. The 
principal  accounting policies  in Notes 2 describe how 
the classes of financial instruments are measured and 
how income and expenses, including fair value gains 
and losses, are recognized. The following table analyses 
the financial assets and liabilities in the statement 
of financial position by class of financial instrument 
to which they are assigned, and therefore by the 
measurement basis:
Financial assets   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Cash and cash equivalents  -      963,960,922    -     -      963,960,922  
Non-pledged trading assets    143,156,280   - -  -      143,156,280  
Investment securities -  -  87,240,744    1,383,955,004    1,471,183,749  
Loans and advances to customers -     2,504,366,677     - -     2,504,366,677   
Investments (other than securities)  2,923,386    - -  -       2,923,386  
Other assets  -        54,130,187      -     -       54,130,187   
Total financial assets   146,079,666       3,522,457,786     87,240,744    1,383,955,004      5,139,733,201 
Total non-financial assets -  - - -    297,288,918    
Total assets            5,437,022,119  Financial 
Assets at FVPL31 December 2021Loan and 
Advances at 
amortised 
costDebt
 Instrument 
Designated at 
FVOCIDebt 
Instrument 
at amortised 
costTotal Carrying 
Amount Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
To meet the financial needs of customers, the Bank enters 
into various irrevocable commitments and contingent 
liabilities. These consist of financial guarantees, 
letters of credit and other commitments to lend. Even 
though these obligations may not be recognised on the 
statement of financial position, they contain credit risk 
and,therefore, form part of the overall risk of the Bank.
Letters of credit and guarantees (including standby 
letters of credit) commit the Bank to make payments 
on behalf of customers in the event of a specific act, 
generally related to the import or export of goods. 
Guarantees and standby letters of credit carry a 
similar credit risk to loans. The nominal values of such 
commitments are listed below.Impairment losses on guarantees and other 
commitments
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount and 
the corresponding allowance for impairment losses in 
relation to guarantees and other commitments is, as 
follows:
Financial guarantees
The table below shows the credit quality and the 
maximum exposure and year-end stage classification
94
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
 Deposits from banks and customers                                                                                        -            3,393,057,184    3,393,057,184   
 Borrowings                                                                                                                                          -               588,864,628     588,864,628  
  Derivative Liabilities Held for Risk Management                                              40,509,648 -  40,509,648 
 Other liabilities                                                                                                                                  -                 386,025,322          386,025,322      
 Total financial liabilities                                                                                      40,509,648          4,367,947,135         4,408,456,782      
 Total non-financial liabilities       1,028,565,337     
 Total liabilities and shareholders fund     5,437,022,119     
      Financial 
 Liabilities 
 Measured at  
 Amortised Cost
 
 GH¢ Financial 
Assets
at FVPL
 
 GH¢ Financial liabilitiesTotal 
Carrying 
Amount
 GH¢ 
 GH¢  GH¢  GH¢  GH¢  GH¢
Cash & cash equivalents  -      1,561,983,616    -     -      1,561,983,616  
Non-pledged trading assets  67,896,476    -     -     -      67,896,476  
Investment securities  -     -     108,961,776       427,587,822     536,549,598  
Loans and advances to customers  -      2,562,706,675    -     -      2,562,706,675  
Investments (other than securities)   12,236,465    -     -     -      12,236,465  
Other assets  -      66,511,519    -     -      66,511,519  
Total financial assets  80,132,941    4,191,201,810     108,961,776       427,587,822     4,807,884,349  
Total non-financial assets       307,322,003  
Total assets       5,115,206,352 
The fair values approximates their carrying amounts. Hence no further disclosure on fair values.Financial 
Assets at FVPL31 December 2020Loan and 
Advances at 
amortised 
costEquity 
Instrument 
Designated at 
FVOCIDebt 
Instrument 
at amortised 
costTotal Carrying 
Amount 
Financial liabilities
Deposits from banks and customers  3,485,289,259     3,485,289,259  
Borrowings  366,266,787     366,266,787 
Other liabilities  338,055,417     338,055,417  
Total financial liabilities   4,189,611,463     4,189,611,463  
Total non-financial liabilities    925,594,889 
Total liabilities and shareholders fund    5,115,206,352  Financial 
 Liabilities 
 Measured at  
 Amortised Cost 
 GH¢ 
Financial liabilitiesTotal 
Carrying 
Amount
 GH¢ 
95
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNote
GH¢
GH¢ GH¢ GH¢ GH¢31 December 2021
31  December  2020Level 1
GH¢Level 2
GH¢Level 3
GH¢Total
GH¢
 
Assets:                       
Non-Pledged Trading assets  18    -     143,156,280      -       143,156,280   
Equity investment  19     -      2,923,386        -       2,923,386   
Total Assets    146,079,666  -  146,079,666 
Liabilities:                       
Derivative Financial Liabilities   26    -       40,509,648        -      40,509,648   
Total Liabilities  - 40,509,648 -  40,509,648 
 Note Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
 GH¢                      
 Non-Pledged Trading assets  18    -      67,896,476       -        67,896,476    
Equity investment  19     -     12,236,465        -      12,236,465    
  Total Assets  -  80,132,941   -   80,132,941 
There were no transfers between levels 1 and 2 within the period.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
36. Determination of fair value and fair values hierarchy
The Bank uses the following hierarchy for determining 
and disclosing the fair value of financial instruments by 
the valuation technique:
 y Level 1: Quoted (unadjusted) prices in active 
markets for identical assets or liabilities.
 y Level 2: Other techniques for which all inputs have 
a significant effect on the recorded fair. 
 y Level 3: Techniques for which inputs have a 
significant  effect on the recorded fair value that are 
not based on observable market data. 
Financial assets and liabilities measured using a 
valuation technique based on assumptions that are 
supported by prices from observable current market 
transactions are assets and liabilities for which pricing is 
obtained via pricing services, but where prices have not 
been determined in an active market, financial assets 
with fair values based on broker codes, investment in 
private equity funds with fair values obtained via fund Managers and assets that are valued using the Bank’s 
own models whereby the majority of assumptions are 
market observable.
Non-market observable inputs means that fair values 
are determined in whole, or in parts, using a valuation 
technique, based on assumptions that are neither 
supported by prices from observable current market 
transactions in the same instrument, nor are they 
based on available market data. The main asset classes 
in this category are unlisted equity investments and 
debt instruments. Valuation techniques are used to 
the extent that observable inputs are not available, 
thereby allowing for situations in which there is little, 
if any, market activity for the asset or liability at the 
measurement date. Therefore,  observable inputs reflect 
the Bank’s own assumption  about the assumptions 
that market participants will use in pricing the asset or 
liability (including assumptions about risk). These inputs 
are developed based on the best information available 
which might include the Bank’s own data. Valuation was 
conducted by KOA Consult and Value Properties.
The following shows  an analysis of financial instruments recorded at fair value by level of the fair value hierarchy done on a 
recurring basis.
96
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Level 2 valuation technique
The assets in Level 2 comprise mainly Government of 
Ghana securities (Treasury Bills). They are valued using 
published results of tender for Government of Ghana 
and Bank of Ghana bill, notes and bonds at the financial 
year end.
Level 3 valuation technique
The assets in Level 3 comprise revaluation gain on the 
Bank’s fixed assets. Fair value of the properties was 
determined using the market comparable method. The 
valuations have been performed by the valuer and are 
based on proprietary databases of prices of transactions 
for properties of similar nature, location and condition. 
37. Financial risk management
Risk   is   inherent   in   the   Bank’s   activities   but is 
managed through a process of ongoing identification, 
measurement and monitoring, subject to risk limits 
and other controls. This process of risk management is 
critical to the Bank’s continuing profitability and each 
individual within the Bank is accountable for the risk 
exposures relating to his or her responsibilities.
The Bank is exposed to credit risk, liquidity risk, interest 
rate risk and market risk. It is also subject to various 
operating risks.
The independent risk control process does not include 
business risks such as changes in the environment, 
technology and industry. The Bank’s policy is to monitor 
those business risks through the Bank’s strategic 
planning process. 
Risk management structure
The  Board  of  Directors  is  ultimately  responsible for 
identifying and controlling risks. However, there are 
separate independent bodies responsible for managing 
and monitoring risks.
Board of Directors
The Board of Directors is responsible for the overall 
risk management approach and for approving the risk 
management strategies and principles.
Risk committees
The Risk Committees have the overall responsibility 
for  the  development   of  the  risk  strategy   and 
implementing  principles, frameworks, policies and 
limits. The  Risk  Committees  are  responsible  for 
managing risk decisions and monitoring risk levels. The 
main Risk Committees  and its frequency  of meetings 
are:i. Credit Risk Committee - Quarterly;
ii. Asset and Liabilities Committee - Bi-monthly;
iii. Market Risk Committee - Quarterly;
iv. Operational Risk Committee (Periodic and 
Permanent Control, Business Continuity Planning 
and Compliance) - Quarterly.
Risk management
Risk Management is done under specialists units of 
Credit and Market Risk Department and Operational 
and Permanent Control Division. These Units are 
responsible for implementing and maintaining risk 
related procedures to ensure independent control 
process is maintained. Societe Generale Ghana Risk is 
managed through a process of ongoing identification, 
measurement and monitoring, subject to risk limits and 
other controls.
This process of risk management is critical to the Bank’s 
continuing profitability and each individual within the 
Bank is accountable for the risk exposures relating to his 
or her responsibilities. The Bank is exposed to credit risk, 
liquidity and interest rate risk and market risk. It is also 
subject to various operating risks. The independent risk 
control process does not include business risks such as 
changes in the environment, technology and industry.
The Bank’s policy is to monitor those business risks 
through the Bank’s strategic planning process.
Risk control
Risk Control is done under the various specialist units 
of Risk Management where monitoring of compliance 
with risk principles, policies and limits across the Bank 
is undertaken. Each business group has its own unit 
which is responsible for the independent control risks, 
including monitoring the risk of exposures against 
limits and the assessment of risks of new products and 
structured transactions. These units also ensure  the 
complete capture of the risk in risk measurement and 
reporting systems through the various committees to 
the Board.
97
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Bank treasury
The Bank’s Treasury is responsible for managing the Bank’s 
assets and liabilities and the overall financial structure. It is 
also primarily responsible for the funding and liquidity risks 
management of the Bank.
Internal control systems
The bank has in place internal control systems and mechanisms 
aimed at ensuring that legal and regulatory provisions, 
ethics, and professional practices are complied with, internal 
processes of the bank are functioning properly and the financial 
information are reliable. The system is particularly designed to 
identify malfunctions and irregularities, to efficiently control 
risks, and to make sure that information systems are reliable. 
Internal control system distinguishes two levels of control: 
Permanent Control which forms the first level of control and 
Periodic Controls as a second level of control.
Permanent Control is essential for the bank’s internal control 
structure and is defined as all procedures  implemented on a 
permanent basis to guarantee that operations carried out on 
an operational level are correctly handled, secure and valid. It is 
based on day-to-day security, which is everyone’s responsibility 
and on formal supervision carried out by management. 
Periodic control activities are performed by dedicated and 
specialized teams of auditors which are independent from 
the operational entities. The scope of Periodic Controls 
encompasses all the bank’s activities and can focus on any 
aspect of these activities, without any restrictions. 
Internal Audit
The Bank’s policy is that risk management processes 
throughout the Bank are audited annually by  the  internal  
audit  function,  which  examines both  the  adequacy  of  the  
procedures  and  the Bank’s compliance with the procedures. 
Internal Audit  discusses  the  results  of  all  assessments with 
management,  and reports its  findings and recommendations 
to the Audit Committee.
The most significant risks which the bank is exposed to and 
how they are managed are as below:
Credit risk
Credit risk is the risk that the Bank will incur a loss because its 
customers or counterparties fail to discharge their contractual 
obligations.
The Bank manages and controls credit risk by setting 
limits on the amount of risk it is willing to accept for 
individual  counterparties  and for geographical and industry 
concentrations, and by monitoring exposures in relation to 
such limits.The Bank also manages its counter party risk through adherence 
to Bank of Ghana prudential requirements by ensuring that it’s 
secured lending to any single borrower is below 25% of its net 
worth and that any single unsecured lending by the bank is less 
than 10% of the bank’s net worth.
The framework for managing this risk is the credit policy which 
spells out the overall underwriting standards, credit approval 
process, credit administration and recovery processes. The 
policy is reviewed from time to time (at least yearly) in response 
to risk profile of new business opportunities/products  and  any  
challenges  with  the  recovery process.
The Bank has established a credit quality review process 
through the Credit Committee to provide early  identification of  
possible  changes in  the creditworthiness  of  counterparties,  
including regular collateral revisions. Counterparty limits are 
established by the use of a credit risk classification system, 
which assigns major counterparty a risk rating.
Risk ratings are subject to regular revision.
The  credit  quality  review  process  aims  to  allow the Bank 
to assess the potential loss as a result of the risks to which it is 
exposed and take corrective action.
The Bank’s credit quality review process is established   in  
line  with   the  Societe   Generale Group’s risk management 
governance based on the following;
 y A strong managerial involvement throughout the 
entire organization: From the Board of Directors 
through to the Credit Committee and to the 
operational field management teams.
 y A  tight framework  of internal procedures  and 
guidelines.
 y A well defined permanent supervision  process that 
assists to identify through a self examination the 
need for review of certain processes to improve on 
the Bank’s credit delivery and collection processes.
 y Independence  of Risk assessment department 
from the business divisions;
 y A consistent approach to risk assessment and 
monitoring applied throughout the Group.
The bank in estimating and establishing its potential credit 
losses, counterparty limits are established by the use of a credit 
risk classification system, which assigns major counterparties a 
risk rating. Risk ratings are subject to regular revision.
The  credit  quality  review  process  aims  to  allow the bank 
to assess the potential loss as a result of the risks to which it is 
exposed and take corrective action.
98
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Maximum credit exposure
  2021   2020  
  GH¢   GH¢
Due from bank and other financial institution   283,381,957     921,536,236  
Non-pledged trading assets   143,156,280     67,896,476  
Debt instruments  at  amortised  cost     1,383,955,004      427,587,822  
Loans and advances     2,804,858,737      2,825,769,351  
Unsecured contingent liabilities and commitments    1,079,859,911      665,074,990  
   5,695,211,890     4,907,864,875 
Fair value of collateral held
The Bank holds collateral against loans and advances to customers in the form of mortgage interests over property, other 
registered securities over assets, and guarantees.  Estimates of fair value are based on the value of collateral assessed at 
the time of borrowing, and generally are not updated except when a loan is individually assessed as impaired.The Credit Committee also monitors the portfolio of 
loans and debt collection operations.
 y analyze the portfolio of loans: retail customers, 
companies, banks and financial institutions and 
sovereign,
 y monitor irregular commitments  and the main 
sensitive risks, y monitor debt collection  files,
 y assess guarantees and monitor provisions,
 y ensure  that the actions reported are monitored 
and performed
Using provisions made on facilities above 90 days, the 
credit risk exposure for the bank is considered to be 
stable over a three year period.
An estimate of the fair value of collateral and other security enhancements held against financial assets is shown below:
  2021    2020  
 GH¢   GH¢
Against impaired assets  243,630,045     299,019,226  
Against past due but not impaired assets   34,877,174    75,009,807  
  278,507,219     374,029,033 
Liquidity risk and structural interest rate risk
Liquidity risk
Liquidity risk arises from the mismatch of the timing of cash flows relating to assets and liabilities. The liquidity policy of 
the Bank is approved by the Board under guidelines issued by Societe Generale Group and monitored daily to ensure that 
its funding requirements can be met at all times and that a stock of high quality liquid assets is maintained.
The net liquidity gap resulting from liquidity analysis of  assets  and  liabilities  of  the  Bank  as  of  31  December  2020   is 
shown in the table below.
99
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Maturity analysis of assets and liabilities
The table shows a summary of assets and liabilities analysed according to their undiscounted contractual terms of the 
transactions and models of historic client behaviour as well as conventional assumptions for some balance sheet items.
  Below 3  3 to 6   6 to 12  Above 1
As at 31  December  2021 Total months  months   months  year
 GH¢ GH¢  GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Assets    
Cash and cash equivalents   963,248,795      963,248,795    - - -
Non-pledged trading assets  143,156,280     143,156,280    - - -
Debt instruments  at fair value through other comprehensive income   87,240,744    - - -   87,240,744  
Investment securities   1,384,667,134         1,331,168,093       21,146,405     1,011,716      31,340,919  
Loans and advances to customers   2,504,366,677      497,833,962      303,401,761     508,086,205      1,195,044,749   
Equity investments    2,923,386     - - -     2,923,386    
Other assets    54,130,184        37,891,129        10,826,037       5,413,018    
Property, plant and equipment   255,268,418    - - -   255,268,418 
Intangible assets   15,009,794   - - -   15,009,794  
Deferred tax assets   27,010,707         27,010,707     - - -
Total assets    5,437,022,119         3,000,308,966        335,374,203       514,510,940       1,586,828,010  
Liabilities
Deposits from banks  1,916,501      1,916,501   - - -
Deposits from customers   3,391,140,683       1,043,511,541      461,185,629       450,845,989       1,435,597,523   
Borrowings  588,864,628  108,860,563  6,307,983   25,077,046   448,619,037 
Derivative liabilities held for risk management    40,509,648      40,509,648   -   - - 
Current tax liabilities     21,325,186          21,325,186     -  - -
Other liabilities    364,700,136        138,816,628  138,816,668     87,066,839    -
Total liabilities     4,408,456,782        1,354,940,067          606,310,281      562,989,874       1,884,216,560   
Net liquidity gap    1,028,565,337        1,645,368,899      (270,936,078)  (48,062,324)   (297,388,550)
Contingent liabilities     261,148,100        122,661,628         54,859,066     80,577,097    3,050,310  
100
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
The gap profile is the difference between assets and liabilities which is calculated for each time- bucket. The results of this calcu -
lation are stressed and analysed through the internal ALM Report or the Group Report Structural Risk Committee.
Societe Generale Ghana PLC has a large and diversified deposit base which serves as a large part of mid and long-term financing 
resources.
Contractual maturities of undiscounted cash flows of financial assets and liabilities
The table shows a summary of financial assets and liabilities analysed according to their undiscounted contractual terms of the 
transactions and models of historic client behaviour (models determined with the contribution of the Group), as well as conven -
tional assumptions for some balance sheet items.  Below 3  3 to 6   6 to 12  Above 1
As at 31  December  2020 Total months  months   months  year
 GH¢ GH¢  GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Assets    
Cash and cash equivalents  1,561,983,616   1,561,983,616  - - -
Non-pledged trading assets 67,896,476   67,896,476  - - -
Debt instruments  at fair value through other comprehensive income 108,961,776  - - -  108,961,776 
Investment securities  427,587,822    353,201,522    13,109,189    29,284,201    31,992,910 
Loans and advances to customers 2,562,706,675   435,599,801   454,323,741   422,650,850   1,250,132,283 
Equity investments  12,236,465  - - -  12,236,465 
Other assets  66,511,519   41,499,925   19,453,462   5,558,132  
Property, plant and equipment 290,748,100  - - -  290,748,100 
Intangible assets  1,264,470  - - -  1,264,470 
Deferred tax assets  15,309,433   15,309,433  - - -
Total assets 5,115,206,352   2,504,991,350   487,034,445   456,849,171   1,666,331,386
Liabilities
Deposits from banks  3,945,938   3,945,938  - - -
Deposits from customers  3,481,343,321   990,495,465   641,908,961   458,440,299   1,390,498,596 
Borrowings  366,266,787   3,168,110   3,214,257   6,382,367   353,502,054
 Current tax liabilities  25,752,524   25,752,524  - - -
Other liabilities  312,302,893   93,690,868   93,690,868   124,921,157  -
Total liabilities  4,189,611,463   1,117,052,905   738,814,085   589,743,822   1,744,000,650 
Net liquidity gap  925,594,889   1,387,938,444   (251,779,641)  (132,894,651)  (77,669,264)
Contingent liabilities  665,076,000   447,272,834   101,719,762   89,965,055   26,118,349
101
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
As at 31 December 2020   Below 3   3 to 6   6 to 12  Above 1
  Total   months   months   months  year
  GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Financial assets     
Cash and cash equivalents    1,561,983,616             1,561,983,616      -     -     -   
Non-pledged trading assets    67,896,476    67,896,476       -     -     -   
Debt instruments  at fair value through     108,961,776  -   -   -    108,961,776   
othercomprehensive income 
Debt instruments  at  amortised  cost     488,740,938   437,006,335     15,150,438       33,049,554       3,534,611   
Loans and Advances to Customers     2,859,413,075   451,684,323        487,875,549        485,076,381         1,434,776,821   
Equity investments   12,236,465     -      -     -     12,236,465 
Total financial assets     5,099,232,346     2,518,570,750       503,025,987      518,125,935       1,559,509,674   
Financial liabilities     
Deposits from banks    3,945,938     3,945,938     -     -     -    
Deposits from customers    3,538,538,820    1,022,353,891       661,940,918       463,745,415      1,390,498,596   
Borrowings   370,474,208    -     7,727,987        7,587,228     355,158,992  
 Total financial liabilities    3,912,958,966      1,026,299,829       669,668,905       471,332,643      1,745,657,588  
Structural interest rate
The interest rate risk is the incurred risk in case of  interest  rate  variations  because  of  all  on-and off- financial position 
operations,  except operations subject to market risks. Global Interest Rate Risk is corresponding to interest rate on the 
banking portfolio.
The strategic management of liquidity is done at a high level of Senior Management (ALCO); review of results on weekly 
basis in line with competition and economic conditions and also ensure that regulatory requirements are met.
The risk management is supervised by the Group. Limits are defined at Group consolidated level and at the level of each 
Group consolidated entity, and are validated by the Credit Risk Committee. The Finance department of the Group is 
responsible for checking the risk level of Societe Generale Ghana Plc.As at 31 December 2021   Below 3   3 to 6   6 to 12  Above 1
  Total   months   months   months  year
  GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Financial assets     
Cash and cash equivalents    963,248,795             963,248,795     -     -     -   
Non-pledged trading assets    143,156,280   143,156,280      -     -     -   
Debt instruments  at fair value through other    87,240,744  -   -   -   87,240,744  
comprehensive income  
Debt instruments  at  amortised  cost    1,563,556,858   1,501,728,024     23,926,499     1,158,439      36,743,895  
Loans and Advances to Customers      2,799,083,006   516,365,831         325,990,022        583,740,241         1,372,986,912    
Equity investments     2,923,386  -      -      -        2,923,386  
Total financial assets      5,559,209,069      3,124,498,930        349,916,521      584,898,680       1,499,894,937    
Financial liabilities     
Deposits from banks   1,916,501    1,916,501    -     -     -    
Deposits from customers    3,421,828,257    1,060,875,539     471,172,240      454,182,955      1,435,597,523   
Borrowings   607,370,049    109,852,641    7,459,642      26,424,679      463,633,087  
 Total financial liabilities   4,031,114,807     1,172,644,680     478,631,882      480,607,634       1,899,230,611  
102
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Interest Rate Risk Exposure
Interest rate risk exposure  is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate because 
of changes in market interest rates. The Bank’s exposure to the risk of changes in market interest rates relates primarily to 
the financial assets and liabilities  with variable/floating interest rates. The following table demonstrates the sensitivity to 
a reasonable possible change in interest rates, with all other variable held constant, of the Bank’s profit before tax (through 
the impact on the floating rate financial assets and liabilities). 
Sensitivity of projected increase or decrease in  interest rate is analysed below.
Market risk
Market risk is the risk of losses being incurred as a result of adverse movements in interest or exchange rates and arises in 
the Bank’s treasury activities.
Market risk is controlled by interest mismatch and foreign currency open position limits approved by the Executive 
Committee of the Bank and monitored daily. The foreign currency exposure analysis of the Bank is shown in the currency 
exposure table below.Increase/decrease  
in basis points  
 2021 
Increase/decrease  
in basis points  
 2021 Effect on profit  
before tax  
 2021 
Effect on profit  
before tax  
 2021 Effect on equity  
 2021 
Effect on equity  
 2021 31 DecemberSociete Generale Ghana PLC’s main aim is to reduce its exposure to structural interest rate risk as much as possible. To this 
end, any residual interest rate risk exposure must comply with the sensitivity limits set by the Group Financial Committee 
(COFI). The sensitivity is defined as the variation in the net present value of future (maturities of up to 20 years) residual fixed 
rate positions (surplus or deficits) for a 10 basis point parallel increase or decrease in the yield curve. The limit for Societe 
Generale Ghana PLC for the various currencies is within the range of EUR -0.58 and 0.18 million (i.e. between GH¢ -3.96 and 
1.23 million). This limit is -0.39% and 0.12% of shareholders’ equity in reference to the lower and upper limits respectively. 
In order to quantify its exposure to structural interest rate risks, Societe Generale Ghana PLC analyses all fixed- rate assets 
and liabilities on future maturities to identify any gaps. These positions come from their maturities. Once the Bank has 
identified the gaps of its fixed- rate positions (surplus or deficit), it calculates the sensitivity (as defined above) to variations 
in interest rates
 
USD   +1%   -1%   9,784,215    (9,784,215)   6,848,951    (6,848,951)
EURO   +1%   -1%    1,193,607    (1,193,607)   835,525     (835,525)
GH¢   +1%   -1%    18,054,938     (18,054,938)   12,638,457     (12,638,457)
31 December       
USD +1%  -1%    8,996,743    (8,996,743)  6,297,720    (6,297,720)
EURO +1%  -1%   1,316,850     (1,316,850)  921,795     (921,795)
GH¢ +1%  -1%    17,937,903     (17,937,903)   12,556,532     (12,556,532)
103
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
This risk is managed by the establishment of limits, monitoring of exposures on a daily basis and ensuring that regulatory 
requirements are met.
The task of the Market Risk Committee is to:
 y identify,  assess and monitor the market risks generated by transactions made on behalf of:
 y the local Financial department (cash,  liquid assets,  balance  sheet  hedging) in relation with the Assets and Liabilities 
Management Committee
 y professional customers (companies and institutional investors)
 y define and monitor alert procedures
 y make sure that the Back Office is really independent of  the Front Office.
Exchange rate sensitivity analysis
The Bank’s foreign exchange exposures comprise trading and non-trading foreign currency translation exposures.  Foreign 
exchange exposures are principally derived from customer driven transactions.  The sensitivity rates used represents 
management’s assessment of the reasonably possible change in foreign exchange rates. The sensitivity analysis includes 
only outstanding foreign currency denominated monetary items and adjusts their translation at the period end for the 
changes in foreign currency rates. A positive number below indicates an increase in profit or equity whilst a negative number 
indicates a decrease in profit or equity. The profits below are the result of a net long exposure in the foreign currency 
coupled with an increase in the foreign currency rate. The losses on the other hand are mainly due to a net long exposure in 
the foreign currency coupled with  a decrease in the foreign currency rate.
Increase/decrease  
in basis points  
 2021 
Increase/decrease  
in basis points  
 2020 Effect on profit  
before tax  
 2021 
Effect on profit  
before tax  
 2020 Effect on equity  
 2021 
Effect on equity  
 2020 31 December
31 December    GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
USD +1% -1%   (82,013)  82,013   (57,409)  57,409  
GBP +1% -1%  1,481     (1,481)   1,036   (1,036)
EUR +1% -1%  (283,816)   283,816    (198,671)   198,671  
Other currencies +1% -1%   23,135    (23,135)  16,195     (16,195)
    GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
USD +1% -1%   (181,787)   181,787    (127,251)   127,251  
GBP +1% -1%  6,777    (6,777)  4,744    (4,744)
EUR +1% -1%  (219,505)   219,505     (153,654)  153,654  
Other currencies +1% -1%  11,960    (11,960)  8,372    (8,372)
104
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Exchange rate sensitivity analysis
The following methods and assumptions used in the 
computation of sensitivity analysis
i. Foreign currency exposure is assumed to remain at 
constant values (closing balances at the end of the 
year).
ii. Use of average exchange rate for the year under 
consideration.
iii. Use of pre-determined stress levels (relevant range 
of stress level) based on extreme or worst case 
scenarios.
iv. There are no changes in the methods and 
assumptions from the previous periods.
v. The current corporate tax rate is applied in 
determining the effect on profit and equity.
Currency risk
Currency risk is the risk that the value of a financial 
instrument will fluctuate due to changes in foreign 
exchange rates. In Ghana, market activities is mostly 
affected by  movements in the dollar. The cedi has depreciated consistently over the last three years. The 
Statement o f Financial Position  of  SG Ghana is structured 
to take the upside of such a depreciating trend. The 
currency risk of the bank has been stable over a three year 
period.SG Ghana manages currency risk by monitoring 
the open currency positions on a daily basis. The objective 
of monitoring the open position in foreign currency is 
to manage foreign exchange risk due to movements in 
rates as well as changes in liquidity positions. The bank 
has adopted the Bank of Ghana requirement that banks 
maintain a total open position which is not more than 
10% of their net worth. Within this limit, banks are also 
required to maintain single currency open positions 
not more than 5% of net worth.  The bank uses the mid 
revaluation rates published by the Bank of Ghana at the 
end of each working day. The year end rates used for 
foreign exchange translations of the major currencies are 
as follows: US$6.0061, EUR6.8281 and GBP8.1272.
Currency Exposure
The table below summarises the Bank’s exposure to 
foreign exchange rate risks at year- end. The amounts 
stated in the table are the cedi equivalent of the foreign 
currencies.
31 December 2021       
  USD GBP  EURO   Others  Total
  GH¢ GH¢  GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Assets
Cash and balances with bank of ghana    7,505,108    2,407,683    13,527,944    -                   23,440,735  
 Due from other banks and financial institutions    133,453,630    28,096,627     170,109,673      2,338,000                  333,139,930  
 Other assets     709     -   -      -                            710 
 Loan and advances to customers      978,421,540      -      119,360,728    -               1,097,782,268 
 Total assets     1,119,380,987       30,504,310      302,998,345       2,338,000             1,455,221,642    
 Liabilities       
Due to other banks and financial institutions    568,327,213    -      17,070,250    -                   585,397,463
 Due to customers      992,155,792      24,631,840      177,090,318     25,510                1,193,903,460   
 Other liabilities      169,210,808      5,724,420       137,797,495       25                    312,732,748 
Total liabilities     1,729,693,813     30,356,260        331,958,063      25,535              2,092,033,671    
Net on balance sheet position       (610,312,826)    148,050       (28,959,718)   2,312,465               (636,812,029)  
Net off balance sheet position     602,111,525   -      578,160     -                  602,689,685   
Net open position      (8,201,301)   148,050       (28,381,558)    2,312,465                  (34,122,344)
105
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
31  December  2020       
  USD GBP  EURO   Others  Total
  GH¢ GH¢  GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Assets       
Cash and balances with bank of ghana    6,911,313   5,241,501   6,205,637   -     18,358,451 
 Due from other banks and financial institutions   712,537,223   21,644,828   297,829,013   1,221,934   1,033,232,998 
 Other assets    680   -     0   40   720 
 Loan and advances to customers    899,674,319   383   131,684,968   -     1,031,359,670 
 Total assets    1,619,123,535   26,886,712   435,719,618   1,221,974   2,082,951,839
Liabilities
Due to other banks and financial institutions   338,987,770   -     24,725,050   -     363,712,820 
 Due to customers    1,158,019,032   25,036,008   246,159,468   25,948   1,429,240,456 
 Other liabilities    71,173,055   1,173,006   187,475,690   -     259,821,751 
 Total liabilities    1,568,179,857   26,209,014   458,360,208   25,948   2,052,775,027  
Net on balance sheet position    50,943,678   677,698   (22,640,590)  1,196,026   30,176,812 
Net off balance sheet position     (69,122,400)  -     690,067   -     (68,432,333)
Net open position    (18,178,722)  677,698   (21,950,523)  1,196,026   (38,255,521)
Operational risk
Operational risk is the exposure to financial or other 
damage arising through unforeseen events or failure in 
operational processes and systems. Examples include 
inadequate controls and procedures, human error, 
deliberate malicious acts including fraud and business 
interruption.
Operational procedures are documented in an 
Operations Manual.
The   Bank   has   established   and   implemented an 
integrated Operational Risk (OR) framework comprising 
(i) Loss Collection policy, (ii) Key Risk Indicators 
(KRI) policy, (iii) Permanent Supervision policy, (iv) 
Compliance and anti- money laundering. Policy which 
set out the organizational structure, overall policy 
framework, processes and systems for identifying, 
assessing, monitoring and controlling/ mitigating 
operational risks in the bank.
Societe Generale Ghana PLC has adopted the Societe 
Generale Group BCP policy and methodology which is 
consistent with international standards.
The Bank has also created a comprehensive and 
independent review of the Business Continuity Planning 
and Operational Risk processes.
The Operational Risk Committee’s task is to identify and 
assess the impact of operational risks on the smooth 
running and profitability of the bank, and to define and implement the strategy used to control them by 
continuously adapting the methods used to bring them 
into conformity with regulations in force and Societe 
Generale Group standards.
To achieve this, the Committee:
 y makes sure that the resources made available 
to the Operational Risk team are in line with the 
Bank’s level of exposure.
 y is responsible for the introduction and satisfactory 
operation of permanent supervision, and for the 
bank’s Operational Risk control.
 y is  informed of the main types of operational risks 
and of the main operating losses recorded over the 
period.
 y monitors  the implementation of plans of action 
intended to correct and reduce Operational Risks.
 y validates the findings of regulatory  exercises 
(Risk & Control Self Assessment (RCSA), scenario 
analysis, KRI), introduces and monitors corrective 
action plans.
 y introduces, maintains and tests the BCP and the 
Crisis management system.
 y makes sure that the work done by Permanent 
Supervision is of good quality and approves its 
report.
106
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
 y takes corrective action in the event of a deterioration 
in the control environment.
 y keeps up to date with legislative and regulatory 
changes, as well as recommendations relating to 
periodic control.
 y drafts and presents its activity report particularly 
intended for the Audit and Accounts Committee.
Non compliance & reputation risk and the prevention 
of money laundering
The compliance function ensures that the risks of legal, 
administrative and/or disciplinary penalties, financial 
losses or injury to reputation, arising out of or in 
connection with failure to comply with local legislative 
and/or regulatory banking provisions, ethics and 
professional practices, as well as Societe Generale Group 
instructions, standards and/or processes are identified 
and controlled. Using incidence of non compliance and 
fines, the risk of non compliance has been stable over a 
three year period.
The bank’s compliance activity is overseen at a high 
level by a Senior Management Officer,  the Head of 
Compliance and through the Compliance Committee 
chaired by the Managing Director.
The main tasks of the compliance function are namely:
y to define in accordance with  legal  and regulatory 
requirements, the policies, principles and  
procedures applicable to compliance and the 
prevention of money laundering and terrorist 
financing and ensure that they are implemented.
y to ensure that professional and financial market 
regulations are respected.
y to prevent and manage any potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to customers.
y to train and advise staff and increase their 
awareness of compliance issues.38. Regulatory breaches
The Bank was fined an amount of GH¢2,259,178 by the 
Bank of Ghana (BoG) in respect of regulatory breaches 
in relation to the breach of single obligor limit and late 
submission of returns.
39. Segmental  reporting
For management purposes, the bank is organized 
broadly  into three  operating segments based on 
products and services as follows;
y Retail Banking- This Unit primarily serves the needs 
of individuals, high net worth clients, institutional 
clients and very small businesses. It is principally 
responsible for providing loans and other credit 
facilities, as well as mobilizing deposits and 
providing other transactions.
y Corporate Banking- This Unit is principally 
responsible for providing loans and other 
credit facilities, as well as mobilizing deposits 
and providing other transactions to the Bank’s 
corporate clients.
y Treasury- This Unit undertakes the bank’s funding 
activities. It also manages the liquidity position of 
the Bank through activities such as borrowings, 
and investing in liquid assets such as short-term 
placements and government debt securities.
Management monitors the operating results of each 
Business Units separately for the purpose of making 
decisions about resource allocation and performance 
assessment. Segment performance is evaluated based 
on operating profit or loss which in certain respects is 
measured differently from operating profit or loss in the 
financial statements. The main source of difference is 
the use of a transfer pricing mechanism in apportioning 
investment income for the segment.
107
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
31 December 2021  Retail Banking    Corporate Banking    Treasury    Total  
 GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢ 
Revenue     
Interest and  similar  revenue (3 parties )     257,730,555        253,262,374     -       510,992,929   
Interest and similar  expense    (62,561,826)   (47,409,641)   (18,950)   (109,990,417)
Net interest margin    195,168,729       205,852,733      (18,950)    401,002,512  
 
Fees &  commission revenue   49,866,714      26,927,625    680,877     77,475,216  
Fees &  commission expense    (24,684,622)  (2,567,586)  -     (27,252,208)
Net commission income    25,182,092     24,360,039     680,877     50,223,008  
Net trading revenue                                                                       415,549       40,377,803    -     40,793,352  
Net income from other financial instruments carried at fair value -   (27,729)       52,863,374        52,835,645   
Other  operating income       34,905,667           56,533,869        -      91,439,536   
Total other operating income       35,321,216            96,883,943         52,863,374         185,068,533    
 Total operating income    255,662,037              327,096,715            53,525,301        636,294,053   
 
Net impairment loss on financial assets      (26,714,611)       (6,692,970)     -       (33,407,581)
Operating income net of impairment charges  228,947,426      320,403,745      53,525,301     602,886,472  
Personnel  expenses       (67,365,683)       (57,546,041)   (10,605,143)  (135,516,867)
Depreciation/ amortisation      (16,384,331)       (15,832,480)     (2,590,788)   (34,807,599)
Other  operating  expenses      (60,511,345)     (77,415,827)    (12,668,135)   (150,595,307)
Total operating expense      (144,261,359)        (150,794,348)    (25,864,066)    (320,919,773)
Profit before tax      84,686,067           169,609,397           27,661,235         281,966,699    
Total  assets       2,178,829,833           3,241,212,669           16,979,617     5,437,022,119    
Total liabilites      2,101,326,756           2,266,620,378           40,509,648      4,408,456,782   
No revenue from transactions with a single customer or counter party amounted to 10% or more of the Bank’s total revenue 
in 2021  or 2020. All Segment revenue are from external customers only. The Accounting policies of the reportable segments 
are the same as the Bank. There were no intra company profit for the period under review.
108
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
31 December 2020  Retail Banking    Corporate Banking    Treasury    Total  
 GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢ 
Revenue     
Interest &  similar  revenue (3 parties )      253,301,527        266,161,852     -       519,463,379   
Interest  & similar  expense    (63,574,762)  (50,185,179)   (491,470)    (114,251,411)
Net interest margin     189,726,765        215,976,673       (491,470)    405,211,968  
 
Fees &  commission revenue   47,445,767       29,303,732     398,607       77,148,106   
Fees &  commission expense     (21,145,168)   (1,702,041)  -      (22,847,209)
Net commission income     26,300,599       27,601,691     398,607       54,300,897   
Net trading revenue                                                                      11,599,263         30,060,981      -       41,660,244   
Net income from other financial instruments carried at fair value -    -      52,417,416       52,417,416   
Other  operating income    (4,053,252)      (591,620)      -       (4,644,872)  
Total other operating income     7,546,011           29,469,361        52,417,416       89,432,788   
 Total operating income     223,573,375            273,047,725         52,324,553        548,945,653  
 
Net impairment loss on financial assets   (16,853,410)    (16,496,164)     -       (33,349,574)
Operating income net of impairment charges   206,719,965    256,551,561     52,324,553    515,596,079 
Personnel  expenses     (64,807,084)       (53,088,864)   (10,795,897)    (128,691,845)
Depreciation/ amortisation     (16,566,882)       (14,284,014)     (2,737,267)    (33,588,164)
Other  operating  expenses     (53,632,798)    (65,501,151)     (12,552,086)    (131,686,035)
Total operating expense       (135,006,765)       (132,874,029)     (26,085,250)   (293,966,044)
Profit before tax      71,713,201           123,677,531         26,239,303         221,630,035   
Total  assets      2,062,121,285            3,033,810,292         15,962,102      5,115,206,352   
Total liabilites      2,006,059,483            2,183,551,980        -      4,189,611,463  
40.   Capital
Capital management
The primary objectives of the Bank’s capital management are to ensure that the bank complies with externally imposed 
capital requirement by Bank of Ghana and that the bank maintains strong credit rating and healthy capital ratios in order 
to support its business and to maximise shareholders value. The Bank manages its capital structure and makes adjustment 
to it in the light of changes in the economic conditions and risk characteristics of its activities. In order to maintain or adjust 
the capital structure, the Bank may adjust the amount of dividend payments to shareholders, return capital to shareholders 
or issue capital securities. No changes were made in the objectives, policies and processes from the previous years.
a. Capital definition
The Bank’s capital comprises stated capital, share deals account, retained earnings including current year profit and various 
reserves the company is statutorily required to maintain. As a bank, it also has regulatory capital as defined below:
b. Stated capital
This amount is made up of issue of shares for cash and transfers from retained earnings.
109
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
c. Income surplus
This amount represents the cumulative annual profits after appropriations  available for distribution to shareholders.
d. Revaluation reserve
This amount comprises revaluation of property, plant and equipment.
e. Statutory reserve
This is amount set aside from annual profit as a non-distributable reserve in accordance with regulatory requirements.
The transfer to Statutory Reserve Fund is in compliance with the Banks and Specialized Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 
2016 (Act 930).
f. Credit risk reserve
This is amount set aside from retained earnings as a non-distributable reserve to meet minimum regulatory requirements 
in respect of allowance for credit losses for non-performing loans and advances.
g. Regulatory capital
Regulatory capital consist of Tier 1 capital, which comprises share capital, share deals account, retained earnings including 
current year profit, foreign currency translation and minority interests less accrued dividend, net long positions in own 
share and goodwill. Certain adjustments are made to IFRS-based result and reserves, as prescribed by the Central Bank of 
Ghana. The other component of regulatory capital is Tier 2 capital which includes revaluation reserves.
h. Other reserves
This is made up of  FVOCI reserves on debt securities and FVOCI on equity investments. FVOCI reserve on debt securities 
records unrealized gains and losses on government securities.
j. Capital adequacy
The adequacy of the Bank’s capital is monitored using, among other measures, the rules and ratios established by the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision and adopted by the Bank of Ghana.  The capital adequacy ratio of the Bank as of 31 
December 2021  is shown below:2021
FVOCI
reserve
 GH¢2020
FVOCI
reserve
GH¢
Opening balances    1,335,904   - 
 Movements in Fair Value  (689,424)   1,781,205   
Investment securities measured at FVOCI- tax    172,356     (445,301)  
    818,835     1,335,904 
110
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
 2021 Actual  2020 Actual
 GH¢   GH¢ 
Ordinary share paid up capital    404,245,427        404,245,427    
Income surplus    69,064,959         34,250,388  
Profit to date 184,329,633 154,208,915
Reserve fund    246,436,222    207,883,993 
    904,076,240          800,588,723     
Regulatory adjustments 93,779,813        78,641,338    
CET 1 Capital    810,296,427       721,947,385  
CET 2 Capital   61,835,129         61,835,129     
Total regulatory capital    872,131,557     783,782,514  
Risk-weighted assets
Credit Risk 2,989,067,556 2,992,450,809
Market Risk 40,130,738 41,086,804
Operational Risk 868,255,691 736,026,536
Total Risk Weighted Assets 3,897,453,985  3,769,564,149
Common Equity Tier 1 / RWA 20.79% 19.15%
Capital adequacy Ratio 22.38%  20.79%
41. Compliance  status of externally imposed capital requirement
During the past year Societe Generale Ghana PLC had complied in full with all its externally imposed capital requirements.
Analysis of Shareholdings
Category  Number of   Number of  Percentage
  shareholders   shares  Holding %
1-1,000    27,032     8,251,397   1.16%
1,001-5,000    5,176     8,846,588   1.25%
5,001-10,000    889     5,563,288   0.79%
Over 10,000    674     686,480,094   96.80%
  33,771     709,141,367   100.0%
42. Subsequent events
On 24 February 2022, the Board affirmed the decision of its ultimate parent to start the winding up of its investment in YUP 
subsequent to an approval from Bank of Ghana. management has determined that there is objective evidence that the 
investment is impaired. A provision calculated as the difference between the carrying value and its recoverable amount has 
been recognised in the statement of profit or loss for the year ended 2021.
111
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
43. Value added statement  
 2021  2020
Value added statements for the year ended 31  December  2021   GH¢    GH¢ 
Interest earned and other operating income      773,536,678        686,044,273  
Direct cost   (137,242,625)   (137,098,620)
Value added by banking services     636,294,053        548,945,653 
Non - banking income  -     623,961
Impairments    (33,407,581)   (33,349,574)
Value added       602,886,472        515,596,079 
 
Distributes as follows:   
To employees :-   
Directors (without executives)   (951,893)   (803,027)
Executive directors   (2,628,396)   (2,391,327)
Other employees   (132,888,471)  (126,300,518)
To government :-  
Income tax    (97,637,066)  (67,421,120)
To providers of capital :- 
Dividend to shareholders   
To expansion and growth :-  
Depreciation    (30,463,364)   (32,459,174)
Amortisation  (4,344,234)   (1,128,990)
Other operating cost    (149,643,414)    (130,883,008)
To retained earnings       184,329,633       154,208,915 
112
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC44. Twenty Largest Shareholders  
Shareholders  Number of   
Account Name  Holding   % Owned
1 SG-FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING  427,079,030   60.22 
2 SOCIAL SECURITY AND NATIONAL INSURANCE TRUST (SSNIT)  137,262,404   19.36 
3 OFORI DANIEL  48,241,241   6.80 
4 SCGN / ENTERPRISE LIFE ASS. CO. POLICY HOLDERS   9,989,540     1.41
5   SCGN/’EPACK INVESTMENT FUND LIMITED TRANSACTION 3,713,443 0.52
6 AMENUVOR GIDEON    3,693,934       0.52   
7 SCGN/CITIBANK KUWAIT INV AUTHORITY   3,428,568    0.48 
8 SOCIETE GENERAL EMPLOYEES’ SHARE OWNERSHIP   3,348,127    0.47 
9 SCGN/DATABANK BALANCED FUND LIMITED  2,538,447   0.36 
10 ENO INTERNATIONAL LLC.  2,494,761   0.35 
11 SCGN/JPMORGAN BK LUX SA RE ROBECO AFRIKA FONDS N.V,  056898600288 2,193,248   0.31 
12 SCGN/CACEIS BANK RE:HMG GLOBETROTTER  2,125,646   0.30 
13 ADJEPON-YAMOAH, BEATRICE E. MRS  1,982,930   0.28 
14 EDC/TEACHERS EQUITY FUND  1,746,206   0.25
15 MR PHILIP OPOKU-MENSAH   1,471,399     0.21   
16 HFCN/ EDC GHANA BALANCED FUND LIMITED  1,381,333   0.19 
17 SCGN/SSB EATON VANCE TAX-, MANAGED EMERGING MARKET FUND  1,345,362   0.19
18 MBG ESSPA SCHEME  1,009,233   0.14 
19 ZBGC/UNIVERSAL PENSION MASTER TRUST SCHEME   977,356     0.14  
20 MINING INDUSTRY MASTER TRUST OCCUPATIONAL PENSION SCHEME   976,348    0.14 
 Total    656,998,556     92.65  
 Others    52,142,811     7.35  
 Grand Total    709,141,367   100.00%
45. Director’s shareholding
Director   Shareholding
NIL  -
46. ANALYSIS OF SHAREHOLDING AT  31 DECEMBER 2020
 NUMBER OF SHAREHOLDERS NUMBER OF SHARES  % HOLDING
NON DEPOSITORY 24,317 19,366,686 2.73
DEPOSITORY (CSD) 9,454 689,774,681 97.27
TOTAL 33,771 709,141,367 100.00Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
113
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNOTES:
i. In compliance with the current restrictions on public 
gatherings in force pursuant to the imposition of 
Restrictions Act, 2020 (Act 1012) and consequent 
Regulatory Directives, attendance and participation by all 
members and/or their proxies in this year’s Annual General 
Meeting of the Company shall be strictly virtual (i.e. by 
online participation).
ii. A member entitled to attend and vote at the Annual 
General Meeting may appoint a proxy to attend (via online 
participation) and vote on his/her behalf. Such a proxy 
need not be a member of the Company.
iii. The appointment of a proxy will not prevent a member 
from subsequently attending and voting at the meeting 
(via online participation). Where a member attends 
the meeting in person (participates on line), the proxy 
appointment shall be deemed to be revoked.
iv. A copy of the Form of Proxy can be downloaded from the 
Societe Generale Ghana website https://societegenerale.
com.gh  and may be filled and sent via email to registrars@
nthc.com.gh or deposited at the registered office of the 
Registrars of the Company, NTHC Company Limited , 
Martco House, Dede Awula Street, Off Kwame Nkrumah 
Avenue, Adabraka Accra to arrive no later than 48 hours 
before the appointed time for the meeting .v. A unique token number  will be sent to shareholders by 
email and/or SMS from 16 September 2022 to give them 
access to the meeting.  Shareholders who do not receive 
this token can contact the Registrars NTHC Company 
Limited , 18 Gamel Abdul Nasser Avenue, Ringway 
Estate, Opposite the British High Commission Accra or on 
telephone number 059 310 5735 or by email  registrars@
nthc.com.gh  or any time after 16 September 2022 but 
before the date of the AGM to be sent the unique token.
vi. To gain access to the Virtual Annual General Meeting , 
shareholders must visit https://sgghanaagm.com and 
input their unique token number shared with them to 
gain access to the meeting. For shareholders who do 
not submit proxy forms to the Registrar of the Company 
prior to the meeting they may vote electronically during 
the Virtual AGM; again, using their unique token number. 
Further assistance on accessing the meeting and voting 
electronically can be found on https://societegenerale.
com.gh and https://sgghanaagm.com
         For further information, please contact the Registrar:
NTHC Company Limited
18 Gamel Abdul Nasser Avenue
Ringway Estate
Opposite the British High Commission
PO Box KIA 9563, Accra
Telephone No:  059 310 5735
Email: registrars@nthc.com.ghNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
114
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCSOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC 
PROXY FORM FOR ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING  
I/We …………………………………………………………………….......……………………………….……………...............……............ 
(Block Capital Please) 
Of ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….................….............. 
being member/members of SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC  
 
hereby appoint…………………………….……….…………………………………………………………………….............….….............
insert full name) 
Of………………………………….………………………………………………………………………………….….........…………............. 
(or failing him the duly appointed Chairman of the meeting) as my/our Proxy to vote for me/us at the Virtual Annual General 
meeting to be held on Thursday 29 September 2022 at 11:00a.m. and at every adjournment thereof): 
RESOLUTION FOR AGAINST
1. To receive the accounts
2. To declare a  dividend 
3. To re-elect  as  non-executive director Mr. Georges Wega 
4. To re-elect  as  non-executive director Mr. Arnaud De Gaudemaris  
5. To re- elect as an Executive Director Mr Hakim Ouzzani 
5.      To elect  as an Independent Non-Executive Director Mrs. Juliana Asante
7.      To elect  as an Independent Non-Executive Director Mr Yvon Puyou
8.      To  approve directors fees
9.      To appoint Auditors
10.    To authorize the Directors to fix the remuneration of the Auditors 
Signed this …………… day of ……………………...................................................…… 2021
Shareholder’s Signature………….................................................……………………………. PROXY FORM
115
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCRESOLUTION TO BE PASSED
AT THE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
 BOARD RESOLUTIONS
 The Board of Directors will be proposing the following 
resolutions which would be put to the Annual General 
Meeting:
 
1. RECEIVE THE 2021 ACCOUNTS
 The Board shall propose the acceptance of the 2021 
Financial Statements as the true and fair view of the state 
of affairs of the company for the year ended 31 December 
2021.
    
2. RESOLUTION NO 2 TO DECLARATION OF DIVIDEND FOR 2021
 
3. RESOLUTION NO 3 TO RE-ELECT MR GEORGES WEGA AS A 
DIRECTOR  
Pursuant to Section 60 of the Constitution of the Company 
Mr Georges Wega retires by rotation and being eligible; 
offers himself for re-election as a Director. 
4. RESOLUTION NO 3 TO RE-ELECT MR ARNAUD DE 
GAUDEMARIS AS A DIRECTOR
 Pursuant to Section 60 of the Constitution of the Company 
Mr Arnaud De Gaudemaris retires by rotation and being 
eligible; offers himself for re-election as a Director. 
5. RESOLUTION NO 3 TO RE-ELECT MR HAKIM OUZZANI AS 
A DIRECTOR
 Pursuant to Section 60 of the Constitution of the Company 
Mr Hakim Ouzzani retires by rotation and being eligible; 
offers himself for re-election as a Director. 6. RESOLUTION NO 4 TO ELECT MRS JULIANA ASANTE AS A 
DIRECTOR  
 Pursuant to Section 60 of the Constitution of the Company, 
the Board of Directors nominated Mrs Juliana Asante.  
Having received the approval of the Bank of Ghana and 
being eligible Mrs Juliana Asante offers herself for election 
as an Independent Director.
7. RESOLUTION NO 4 TO ELECT MR YVON PUYOU AS A 
DIRECTOR
 Pursuant to Section 60 of the Constitution of the Company, 
the Board of Directors nominated Mr. Yvon Puyou as a 
Director.  Having received the approval of the Bank of 
Ghana and being eligible, Mr. Yvon Puyou offers himself for 
election as a Non-Executive Director
8. APPROVE DIRECTORS FEES
 In accordance with Section 185(1)(2) of the Companies 
Act, 2019( Act 992) and Section 78(3) of the Constitution 
of the Bank  it is hereby proposed that the Directors 
remuneration be paid at such a rate not exceeding an 
aggregate of GH¢1,583,920  It is further proposed that the 
Board of Directors be given the mandate to approve the 
emoluments of the Executive Director.
9. TO APPOINT AUDITORS
10. TO AUTHORIZE THE DIRECTORS TO FIX THE 
REMUNERATION OF THE AUDITORS 
 
 
116
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCTHE REGISTRAR
NTHC LIMITED
MARTCO HOUSE
P .O.BOX KA 9563
AIRPORT
ACCRA
FOLD HERE
FOLD HERE
117
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC118
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes
119
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC

Extracted from: SG_Ghana_2022_Annual_Report.pdf
2022 ANNUAL 
REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTSTABLE OF
CONTENTS
Our purpose and values in the service of our clients
Notice and agenda for  annual general meeting 
Corporate information
Profile of  the  board of directors
Key management personnel
Board chairperson’s statement 
Managing director’s review 
Report of the directors
Independent auditor’s  report 
Statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive incomeFinancial highlights
Statement of financial position
Statement of changes in equity
Statement of cash flows
Notes to the financial statements
Other shareholders information
Proxy formResolutions
Branch network02
04
05
06
09
12
15
20
45
5452
55
56
57
58
115
118
119
122
1
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCOUR PURPOSE 
Building together with our clients, a better and sustainable future through responsible and innovative financial solutions.
OUR MISSION STATEMENT 
The Bank’s mission is to create the preferred banking institution, which employs team spirit, innovation, responsibility and commitment to provide quality products and services that best satisfy the needs of our customers.
OUR VALUES: TEAM SPIRIT , INNOVATION, RESPONSIBILITY  
AND COMMITMENT
Team Spirit: is characterised by a sense of service which 
is intended to make  Societe Generale Ghana the leading customer relationship bank and making listening to customers and all other stakeholders, information sharing and solidarity as well as cooperation and internal pooling of resources its main priority.  Innovation: which is providing added value and greater simplification to serve clients with a framework that takes into account reputational risk. Responsibility: that consists of taking decisions quickly to meet the needs of clients and the organisation without sacrificing their long-term objectives. It also involves having the courage both individually and collectively to take responsibility for actions and decisions and finally attaching as much importance to results as well as consequences of decisions for all stakeholders.
Commitment: which makes it possible to make a difference 
and to contribute to the success of clients and the Bank thereby resulting in a high level of service and performance.
OUR  PURPOSE
Helping our clients build the future
We reaffirm the importance of our role as bankers which is to help our clients invest in a more sustainable future. By supporting their projects and helping them grow, we are firmly committed to those who move the world forward.
A trusted partner
Societe Generale Ghana puts value creation for its customers at the heart of its business model, placing itself alongside entrepreneurs growing their businesses and developing their projects. The Bank offers added value in every aspect of its business and in each of its business lines:
 y making life easier for our customers: assisting our customers by providing them with the right service at the right time, combining the best that humans and digital  technology have to offer; y advising: putting our expertise to work for all customer segments by tailoring our support to the issues facing each one of them;
 y connecting people and businesses: creating a link between those who have projects and those who can help them;
 y using our resources responsibly: putting our balance sheet to work to help those who want to invest;
 y evaluating and managing risks: managing risks in a rigorous and responsible manner over the long term;
 y safeguarding interests: undertaking a commitment to respect and protect everyone’s interests while aiming for the highest standards of security and quality of service.
 Customer satisfaction: A priorityCustomer satisfaction is regularly measured and has increased or remained steady at a high level in all our business lines. The Bank has adopted a structured approach to monitor customer satisfaction using a range of tools: opinion surveys, surprise visits, questionnaires and net promoter score ratings. A formalized process to address complaints by our quality team is in place with the protection of our clients being at the forefront of all our operations. We are committed to safeguarding their interests, particularly in light of the growing risks associated with cybercrime.
Corporate culture and ethics
For Societe Generale Ghana, instilling a culture of responsibility based on strong values, notably through our Code of Conduct, means observing the highest standards of integrity and behaviour in all business lines and countries where we operate. The Bank has established ethical principles and ensures that all our staff comply with them. As a responsible employer, we are committed to ensuring the respect of human rights and implement appropriate measures in instances where our principles are not adhered to.
Expertise and skills
The Bank pays particular attention to the quality of our dialogue with staff representative bodies, especially with respect to addressing the challenges of changing business and employment trends. Anticipating the Bank’s business needs, hiring and helping our staff develop their careers, particularly through training and internal professional mobility and promotions, are essential for attracting and retaining talent and strengthening staff loyalty. Diversity and inclusionBuilding a company that is inclusive and reflects the diversity of its customers is one of the Bank’s key ambitions. Above and beyond regulatory obligations, Societe Generale treats diversity and inclusion for all as strategic issues for today and tomorrow, and takes proactive steps in this regard.
OUR PURPOSE AND VALUES IN 
THE SERVICE OF OUR CLIENTS
2
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCPerformance and compensation
To attract and retain talents, Societe Generale Ghana implements an attractive and fair pay policy, which recognizes each staff member’s contribution to the Bank’s performance while ensuring the appropriate management of risks.Health and safetySociete Generale Ghana is committed to developing a respectful and safe working environment to enable every one of its staff  members to work in conditions that are positive for their health and well-being, in particular by promoting the appropriate work-life balance.Our purpose and values in our clients cont’d
3
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT the 43rd Annual General Meeting (“AGM”) of the Shareholders of Societe Generale Ghana PLC (“the 
Company”) will be held VIRTUALLY and streamed live on https://sgghanaagm.com from the Head Office of Societe Generale Ghana PLC on Friday 29 September 2023  at 11:00am to transact the following business: 
ORDINARY BUSINESS: ORDINARY RESOLUTIONS
1. To receive and adopt the Financial Statements of the Company (together with the reports of the directors and the auditors of 
the Company) for the year ended 31 December 2022 
2. To re-elect Directors
3. To approve Directors’ fees
4. To authorize the Directors to determine the remuneration of the Auditors
SPECIAL BUSINESS: SPECIAL RESOLUTIONS 
 5. To amend the constitution of the Company to comply with the Ghana Securities & Exchange Commission Directive for the discontinuation of the usage of dividend warrants as a means of dividend payment.
Dated, this 27 day of April 2023.
.................................................................
BY ORDER OF THE BOARDANGELA NANANSAA BONSUTHE SECRETARY
A member of the Company entitled to attend and vote is entitled to appoint a Proxy to attend and vote instead of him.  A Proxy 
need not be a member.  A form of Proxy is attached to the Annual Report  for it to be valid for the purpose of the meeting it must be completed and deposited with the Registrars, NTHC Limited, Martco House, PO Box KA 9563, Airport Accra, Ghana not less than 48 hours before the appointed time of the meeting. 
+233 302214314
sgghana.info@socgen.comwww.societegenerale.ghana.gh@societegenerale.ghanaSociete Generale Ghana@SG_GhanaNOTICE AND AGENDA FOR
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
4
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCCORPORATE INFORMATION
BOARD OF DIRECTORS       DATE APPOINTED
1. Margaret Boateng Sekyere -  Board Chair Independent Non-Executive 15 September 2020
2. Hakim Ouzzani -     Managing Director   23 January 2017
3. Laurette Korkor Otchere -    Non-Executive    6 September 2017 
4. Agnes Tauty Giraldi -   Non-Executive    1 October 2018  
5. Georges Wega -    Non-Executive      16 August 2019
6. Arnaud De Gaudemaris -  Non-Executive     16 August 2019
7. Fosuhene Acheampong -   Non-Executive    3 June 2020 
8. Francis Awua-Kyerematen -   Independent Non Executive  23 February 2021  
9. Juliana Asante                                - Independent Non-Executive  8 November 2021 
10. Yvon Puyou - Non-Executive     24 January 2022
11. Peggy Dzodzomenyo              -       Independent Non-Executive                               30 June 2022 
12. Arthur Bright               -       Non-Executive      1 July 2022 
COMPANY SECRETARY Angela Nanansaa Bonsu
 Societe Generale Ghana PLC
 2nd Crescent, Royalt Castle Road 
 Ring Road Central
 P .O. Box 13119
 Accra, Ghana
REGISTERED OFFICE 2nd Crescent, Royalt Castle Road 
 Ring Road Central, Accra
 P .O. Box 13119
 Accra, Ghana
AUDITORS Deloitte & Touche        
 The Deloitte Place, Plot No. 71
 Off George Walker Bush Highway
 North Dzorwulu
 Accra, Ghana
REGISTRARS NTHC Limited
 NTHC House
 18 Gamel Abdul Nasser Avenue
 Ringway Estate Accra 
 P .O. Box KA 9563
 Airport, Accra
 Ghana
COUNTRY OF INCORPORATION Ghana, Accra
HOLDING COMPANY SG Financial Services, Holding Company
UL TIMATE HOLDING COMPANY Societe Generale incorporated in France
5
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCPROFILE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
MARGARET BOATENG SEKYERE (Chairperson)
HAKIM OUZZANI  (Managing Director)   
JULIANA ASANTE (Member) PEGGY DZODZOMENYO (Member )
YVON PUYOU (Member)FRANCIS AWUA-KYEREMATEN  (Member)
GEORGES WEGA  (Member) ARTHUR BRIGHT  (Member) LAURETTE OTCHERE  (Member) AGNES TAUTY GIRALDI  (Member)
ARNAUD DE GAUDEMARIS  (Member) FOSUHENE ACHEAMPONG  (Member)
ANGELA NANANSAA BONSU  (Company Secretary)EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
INDEPENDENT NON-EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
NON-EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
BOARD SECRETARY
6
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCMargaret Boateng Sekyere: Board Chair.  She received a 
Bachelor’s degree in Accounting and an MBA from Howard 
University in Washington D.C in 1985 and 1987 respectively. From 1985 to 1989 she was in Public Accounting and Mortgage Banking in the USA after which she joined Price Waterhouse in Ghana as a Management Consultant with special focus on Financial Management Reviews and Assessments of donor funding to public sector institutions. With over 30 years of experience in private and public sector management, she was instrumental in the development of public sector reforms in Sierra Leone in the early 1990s and in Ghana from 2004 to 2007.  In 1993, she was recruited by the Government of Sierra Leone to manage a 5 year Public Sector Program funded by the World Bank. She served as  a Senior Resource Management Officer of the World Bank Office in Ghana from 1998 to 2003. Whilst there, she managed the administrative services and accounting team in the Country Office including training, systematic back-up and replacement planning. She played a key role in the coaching and development of newly recruited resource management staff for Country Offices in the Africa Region – South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe, Malawi, Nigeria, Ethiopia and Kenya.  From 2007 to 2013, she joined a team to set up an Asset Management Firm – OAK Partners Ltd., - providing financing for private real estate projects in Accra. During the period of 2013-2018, she was an Executive Director of Finance and Administration for Belstar Capital. At Belstar, she also played a key role as a Licensed Investment Advisory Representative of the Securities and Exchange Commission, responsible for compliance of financial regulatory matters.  She was nominated to the Board of Directors on 12 July 2019 with Bank of Ghana granting approval on 20 November 2019. Bank of Ghana further approved her appointment as Board Chair on 15 September 2020.
Hakim Ouzzani: Managing Director. He holds a Bachelor of Arts 
degree in Economics and a Master of Arts degree in Organisation Sociology from the Ecole Nationale Superieure d’ Administration et de Gestation National School of Management and Administration.  He also holds a Diploma in Banking and Finance from the Institute of Development Finance Tunis. Mr Ouzzani has a Diploma of Higher Education from the Arab Maghred Development Financing Institute. Before his appointment as Managing Director, he was a Senior Executive Regional Manager with Societe Generale International Banking Financial Services in charge of Cameroun, Chad, Congo Brazzaville, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana and Guinea Conakry. In 1998, he was the New Products Development Manager at the Union Bank.  He has worked as a Professor at the Ecole Superieure de Banque.   He also worked with the Central Bank of Algerie as a Senior Officer Loans & Refinancing Direction and Licencing & Regulatory Function. From 2000 to 2002, he managed the Corporate Branch of the Union Bank Brokerage. From 2012 to 2016, he was the CEO of Societe Generale Chad.
He also held various positions within Societe Generale as Group 
Deputy General Manager SG Algerie, Network and Sales Manager SG Algerie and Network Development Manager SG Algerie.  Mr Ouzzani was nominated to the Board of Directors of Societe Generale Ghana on 16 November 2016 with the Bank of Ghana granting approval to the said appointment on 23 January 2017.Georges K. T . Wega: Non Executive Director. He holds 
an Engineering degree and a Master’s degree in Industrial Engineering from the University of Quebec, Canada. His career spans over 22 years’ having worked in several capacities in organizations around the world. He has acquired a long span of industrial and banking experience during his career. Mr Wega is the Deputy Head of International Retail Banking for Africa, the Mediterranean Basin & Overseas (Societe Generale). Among the places he has worked are Postes Canada (Ottawa), General Electric (Brussels and Amsterdam), Barclays Bank PLC in London and United Bank for Africa (UBA Nigeria). He also served as the Chief Executive Officer of UBA Cameroon for 4 years. He then joined Societe Generale in 2014 as Deputy CEO of Societe Generale Cameroun, before being appointed Chief Executive Officer of Societe Generale Senegal in August 2016. He was nominated to the Board of Directors on 22 November 2018 with Bank of Ghana granting approval on 16 August 2019.
Laurette Korkor Otchere:  Non Executive Director She is a 
Barrister at Law and a Deputy Director General Operations and Benefits at Social Security and National Insurance Trust.  She holds a Juris Doctor; a Bachelor of Arts in Economics and is a Certified Professional in Human Resources (SHRM-CP).  She is a member of the Ghana Bar, State of New Jersey Bar and the United States District Court, District of New Jersey.  She is an Adjunct Professor at Rutgers University School of Management and Labour Relations and the Society for Human Resource Management.  She has extensive working and professional experience internationally and locally.  She joined the Board of Directors in July 2017 with Bank of Ghana granting approval on 6 September 2017.
Agnes Tauty Giraldi: Non Executive Director.   She is the Head 
of Export Finance Africa, Europe and Structured Trade Finance, 
Societe Generale Corporate and Investment Banking. She has over 23 years’ experience in the Corporate Investment Banking sector with an extensive experience of Structured Trade and Export Finance. She has solid experience in emerging markets and has led several deals involving sovereign, sub-sovereign, public and private corporates. She is currently the Head of Export Finance Africa, Europe and Structured Trade Finance, Societe Generale Paris. Within the Societe Generale Group, she has held the following positions; Deputy Head Origination Export Finance, Head of European Origination Export Finance, Country Manager in the Europe and Central Asia Desk, Societe Generale Paris, Vice President Societe Generale Paris responsible  for the execution of the documentation (Loan documentation, Credit Insurance, securities, etc.), Corporate Relationship Manager, Societe Generale London Relationship Manager SMEs, French Network, Societe Generale.   She was nominated to the Board of Directors on 11 April 2018 with Bank of Ghana granting approval on 1 October 2018.
Arnaud De Gaudemaris: Non Executive Director. He holds an 
Engineering Degree from ISEP Paris.  He is the current Chief of Staff to the Head of Societe Generale for the AFMO Region managing about 14,000 staff. He is responsible for the organization of strategy preparation meetings, internal management meetings 
Profile Of The Board Of Directors cont’d
7
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCand also the African Region strategy.  He was nominated to the 
Board of Directors on 28 November 2018 with Bank of Ghana granting approval on 16 August 2019.
Fosuhene Acheampong: Non Executive Director. He is a 
chartered accountant by profession and holds an MBA in Finance from the Lagos State University and a Bsc in Accounting from the University of Lagos. He is currently the Director of Finance and Administration at the Cedar Seal Company Limited.  From 2001-2004, he was the Audit Manager at Deloitte & Touche . He was the Chief Internal Auditor  at the Minerals Commission from 2004-2005 and went on to become the Director of Finance from  2005 - 2006. From 2010 to 2016, he held the following positions in the Access Bank Group; Head Business Banking and Regional Head Western Region. Before the name change to Access Bank, Mr Acheampong worked as Area Manager of Intercontinental Bank for the Western and Ashanti Regions from 2008 to 2010. 
From 2010 to 2012, he was the Group Head Marketing Division 
Retail of Intercontinental Bank.   He also worked with the Bank as Head of Loan Recovery.  He was nominated to the Board in April 2020 with Bank of Ghana granting approval of the said nomination on 3 June 2020.
Francis Awua-Kyerematen: Independent Non-Executive 
Director. He is a Fellow of the Association of Chartered Certified 
Accountants.  He holds a Master of Business Administration from the University of Chicago Business School and a Bachelor of Arts Honours Degree in Accounting and Finance from the Middlesex University London UK. From 1997 to 1998, he served as the Senior Corporate Finance and Recovery Associate at Grant Thornton Ipswich Office ,UK . He also worked as a Senior Compliance Accountant for HM Revenue Customs in the UK from 1998 to 2003. Prior to moving to Ghana, he was with Citigroup in the London Office responsible for Debt Capital Markets – Middle East & African Desk from 2005 . Mr Awua-Kyerematen also worked as the Country Director for Citibank Ghana from 2008 to 2016. He is currently the Principal Advisor and Managing Director for Winchmore Capital.  Mr Awua-Kyerematen was nominated to the Board 14 December 2020 with Bank of Ghana granting approval to the said nomination on 23 February 2021.
Juliana Asante: Independent Non-Executive Director.  She is 
a fellow of both the Institute of Chartered Accountants, Ghana 
(ICAG) and the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA) UK. She holds a Masters in Organisational Change and Development from the University of Manchester (UK), and a Certification in Sustainability for Finance. She has a proven record of success in the origination, development, implementation and improvement of financial accounting and risk management, having held positions such as Senior Audit Manager at Deloitte and Senior Finance Manager at The Central Manchester and Manchester Children’s University NHS Trust (UK).
Since leaving Deloitte in 2002,Juliana has been in private 
practice providing financial management, assurance, advisory and consultancy services through INTEGRITAS, She has also served as an independent consultant on financial, risk and change management to the public, private and third sectors. She currently provides Advisory and Learning & Development upskilling for transformational financial reporting interventions in the Energy, Mining, Educational and Service Sectors. She continues to serve the Institute of Chartered Accountants, Ghana, (ICAG) on various technical committees and has recently been nominated to ICAG’s newly formed statutory Accounting Practice Review Committee (APRC). 
Yvon Puyou: Non-Executive Director.  He holds a Master of 
Business Administration from EDHEC Sophia Antipolis France and a Master’s Degree in Computer Science from the Ecole Centrale de Marseille- Marseille, France. He held the position of Regional Head of Information Technology ,SG Singapore from 1995 to 2000. From 2000 to 2003, he held the position as Senior Executive Director (Member of the Executive Committee) of SG Private Banking (Switzerland) S.A.Geneva, Switzerland  .  Mr. Yvon Puyou was the Global Chief Information Officer at SG Private Banking, Paris France from 2003 to 2005.  He was the Head of Global IT , Head for Core Banking System, Risks and Finance solutions, Societe Generale Paris France from 2005 to 2009. He held the position of Chief Information Officer,  Societe Generale Prague Czech Republic from 2009 to 2015. He was the Chief Operating Officer for Societe Generale Splitska Banka from 2015 to 2017.   He is currently the Chief Information Officer at Societe Generale African Mediterranean& Overseas.  Mr. Yvon Puyou was nominated to the Board of Directors on 14 September 2021 with Bank of Ghana granting approval for the appointment on 24 January 2022. 
Peggy Osei-Tutu Dzodzomenyo: Independent Non Executive 
Director. She holds a Master of Business Administration in 
Finance from the University of Cape Coast and a Bachelor of Commerce and Diploma in Education from the University of Cape Coast. She worked with the Bank of Ghana for 31 years in various departments and capacities. She was the Administrative Officer/ Head of Refurbishing Unit, Estate Department from 1987 to 1992 and a Finance Analyst at the Banking Supervision Department from 1992 to 2002. She was the Head of the Foreign Exchange Unit from 2002 to 2010 as well as Head of the Accra Branch of the Bank of Ghana from 2010 to 2015. Additionally, she was the Head of the Domestic Banking Office from 2015 to 2016 and finally, Director of Banking Department from January 2017 till she retired. She was appointed on 30 June 2022.
Arthur Bright: Non Executive Director. He holds a Master of 
Business Administration in Finance and Financial Management Services from the Edinburgh Business School. He is the Chief of Staff at Societe Generale African Mediterranean and Overseas.  He was a Managing Executive at Société Générale Paris. Over the years, he has gathered experience in managing cross-functional teams and driving business transformation. He has occupied positions such as Director, Chief of Staff for Africa, Mediterranean Basin & Overseas, Director, Head of Innovation SG Cameroon, Director, Head of Retail Banking, Wealth Management & Business Banking and Director, Head of Global Transaction Banking. Before joining the Group, Bright worked with the United Bank for 
Profile Of The Board Of Directors cont’d
8
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCAfrica as a Senior Manager (Operations, E-banking, Transaction 
Banking, Retail and Corporate) and at Eccam Consulting as the Head of Business Development (Civil Engineering). He was appointed on 1 July 2022
.
Hakim Ouzzani: Managing Director. He holds a Bachelor 
of Arts degree in Economics and a Master of Arts degree in Organisation Sociology from the Ecole Nationale Superieure d’ Administration et de Gestation National School of Management and Administration.  He also holds a Diploma in Banking and Finance from the Institute of Development Finance Tunis. Mr Ouzzani has a Diploma of Higher Education from the Arab Maghred Development Financing Institute. Before his appointment as Managing Director, he was a Senior Executive Regional Manager with Societe Generale International Banking Financial Services in charge of Cameroun, Chad, Congo Brazzaville, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana and Guinea Conakry. In 1998, he was the New Products Development Manager at the Union Bank.  He has worked as a Professor at the Ecole Superieure de Banque.   He also worked with the Central Bank of Algerie as a Senior Officer Loans & Refinancing Direction and Licencing & Regulatory Function. From 2000 to 2002, he managed the Corporate Branch of the Union Bank Brokerage. From 2012 to 2016, he was the CEO of Societe Generale Chad.  He also held various positions within Societe Generale as Group Deputy General Manager SG Algerie, Network and Sales Manager SG Algerie and Network Development Manager SG Algerie.  Mr. Ouzzani was nominated to the Board of Directors of Societe Generale Ghana on 16 November 2016 with the Bank of Ghana granting approval to the said appointment on 23 January 2017.
Francois Pousse: Deputy Managing Director.  He holds a 
Master of Science in Finance and Economics from the London 
School of Economics (UK) and from Ecole Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées (FR). Prior to his appointment in SG Ghana, he worked for Inspection Generale at Societe Generale Head Office in Paris for 9 years, where he performed and supervised audit and strategy consulting assignments for the top Management of the Societe Generale Group. He has worked in various fields in the banking sector such as IT transformation in retail banking, market risk on equity derivatives and anti-money laundering. Working in diverse business environments such as Southern France, Hong-Kong, Burkina-Faso, the UK and USA has added to his wealth of knowledge.  He eventually became one of the Managing directors at Inspection, with shared oversight over a team of about 120 people made up of Inspectors, data scientists and support staff directly reporting to Global Head of Inspection. Mr Pousse is also the Treasurer of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry France – Ghana (CCIFG).
Kwame Abbey: Deputy Managing Director in charge of 
Support Functions and Operations.  He is a professionally 
qualified member of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants as well as a Chartered Banker with the requisite professional qualification.  He holds an Honours Degree BSc. (Hons.) in Mechanical Engineering from the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science & Technology, Kumasi.  Kwame Abbey began his career in 1999 at Japan Motors as a Service Coordinator and moved to Mechanical Lloyd in January 2000 as a Sales representative. In the year 2000, he joined Societe Generale Ghana as a Relationship Officer with the Corporate Banking Department. Since then, he has held positions such as Senior Credit Analyst, Head Credit Administration and Head Business Credit Administration and Leasing. In July 2010, he was promoted to Head, Credit Risk and subsequently appointed the Chief Risk Officer of Societe Generale Ghana in 2015. Mr. Kwame Abbey until recently, was the Chief Risk Officer for the Central and East Africa (SG AFCE) region located in Douala, Cameroon.
Bernice Allotey: Chief Operating Officer.  She holds an 
Executive Masters in Business Administration (Finance) and BSC in Computer Science and Statistics both from the University of Ghana, Legon.  She is a proven Project/Programme Manager and a Lean Six Sigma Green belt trained.  Over her 24 years’ experience in the Banking Industry, she has built strong expertise in Project/Change Management, delivering and overseeing strategic projects that cuts across all the various functions in the Bank ; Project Portfolio Management, Information System Management, Business Process Management and Banking operations. Before her appointment as the Chief Operating Officer, she was the Head of Organization and Projects in Societe Generale Ghana from 2008 to 2018 and was responsible for the implementation of the bank’s Project Portfolio by ensuring overall alignment of the organizational structures to the business strategy.  As the Chief Operating Officer, she now oversees the following strategic departments; Organization and Projects, Information Systems & Technology, Information security, Operations, Logistics and Physical Security.
  Angela N. Bonsu: Company Secretary General Manager.   
Ms Bonsu holds a Master of Business Administration from the Middlesex University Business School, London and an honours degree in Law from the Birkbeck College, University of London.  She is a professionally qualified member of the Institute of Directors Ghana.  Ms Bonsu holds an ACAMS Certification for Anti-Bribery and Corruption. She has rich professional experience in Company Secretaryship, Compliance, Corporate Governance, Business Integration, Global Employee Share Ownership Programmes, Legal Administration, Human Resource, and Project Management with over 20 years’ experience working in various capacities. As the Company Secretary for a Bank listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange, she also has oversight responsibility for the Legal Department, Environmental & Social Management Systems, Sustainable Development & Corporate Social Responsibility.  She furthermore has oversight responsibility for the Permanent Control Department. 
Felix Adjaku: Chief Finance Officer. He is a fellow of the 
Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA) UK and holds a Bachelor’s degree in Sociology from the University of Ghana. Felix has worked in various departments of the 
KEY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL
9
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCbank namely Corporate banking as a Credit Analyst, Treasury 
Department as an Assets and Liability Management Officer and as a Branch Officer with the Retail Banking Department. Before being appointed the Chief Finance Officer, he was the Head of Financial Reporting and Performance Measurement. Felix has over 10 years’ experience in banking.
Pierre Glemot: Chief Risk Officer. He has a Master’s Degree 
in Economic Development and International Economics from Maxwell School, Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York, USA.He holds a Bachelor of Arts (Cum Laude) double major in Spanish and Economics from Millsaps College, Jackson, Mississippi, USA. He is an experienced professional in retail banking and risk management with a track record in diverse environments as well as proven strong adaptation and innovative capabilities. His experience and achievements include; extensive banking experience gained in diverse geographies, successful implementation of  innovative ideas for cost optimization and process efficiency. Since joining the Societe Generale Group, he has held positions such as Risk and Collection Director, Societe Generale Burkina Faso; Risk Manager, Societe Generale France and Chief Risk Officer  Societe Generale Serbia and Seabank, Vietnam. His other positions include Client Manager (International companies) and SME Manager, SG Expressbank Bulgaria, Risk Director, SGMB Morocco, Corporate Trader and Credit Risk Analyst Societe Generale, France. He was appointed on 7 October 2022 after approval from Bank of Ghana.
Abena Asare-Menako: Chief Compliance Officer.  She holds 
a Masters’ degree in Finance from University of Leicester, U.K. and is an Associate of the Chartered Institute of Bankers, Ghana and the Chartered Institute of Marketing, U.K. Abena is also a Certified Anti-Money Specialist (CAMS) and a Certified Global Sanctions Specialist (CGSS). She is an experienced banking professional with expertise in Training, Resource Management, Retail Banking, Business/Corporate Banking, Sales, Marketing, Relationship Management, Card and POS (Payments) Management, Banking Operations, Operational Risk, Project Management, AML and Compliance Management. She possess excellent interpersonal, analytical, and organizational skills with the ability to excel within highly competitive environments where leadership skills are the keys to success. She is an effective manager with the proven skills necessary to direct, train, and motivate human resource to its fullest potential while also possessing a strong capacity to focus on strategic intent with revenue generation and management of cost. She is  responsible for the Bank’s Financial Crime and Regulatory Compliance topics, ensuring the Bank complies with all relevant anti-money laundering regulations and all other regulatory obligations.   
Catherine Johnson: General Manager Treasury and Global 
Markets.  She holds a BSc Accounting Degree from Cardiff  University in Wales and is a member of the Association Cambiste Internationale (ACI) based in Paris. She also holds a Master’s Degree in International Securities, Investments and Banking from the ISMA Centre, Henley Business School, UK with a special focus on Financial Engineering and Fixed Income Solutions. She has over 20 years’ extensive commercial banking experience both in Ghana and internationally. Her vast experience over the years cover areas of Strategy, Business Development, Treasury Management, Corporate Banking, Balance Sheet Risk Management and Market/Trading activities. She is currently in charge of managing the assets and liabilities structure of the bank and has direct responsibility for developing market/trading teams, products/solutions, funding and the general trading framework. She also manages key treasury relationships with the Regulator, Financial Institutions and Clients.
Obed Hoyah: General Manager Retail Business. He holds a 
Master of Science degree in Management from the University of Maryland University College (Graduate School of Management & Technology) in Maryland, USA and a Bachelor of Science degree in Accounting from Rhode Island College, Providence, RI, USA.  Obed is a seasoned banker who has worked in different capacities in the bank, as Head of SME, Pre-Recoveries, and Credit & Operational Risk before taking on a role at Retail Banking.  He was the Project Manager for the RUBI Project, which transformed the structure of the network from an Operational organization to a Sales and Service outfit.  He has over 20 years’ experience in the industry both in Ghana and the USA, where he started his banking career.
Daniel Kwesi Sarpong: Head, Corporate Coverage. He holds 
a degree in Commerce from the University of Cape -Coast, 
an International MBA from the Paris Graduate School of Management, Paris and is a certified member of the Chartered Institute of Bankers. Daniel began his career 22 years’ ago as a Banking Officer with Merchant Bank Ghana Limited (Now Universal Merchant Bank) in June 2000 and worked in the Bank’s Kumasi and Bibiani branches as an operations officer. He left Merchant Bank in September 2003 to join Stanbic Bank Ghana Limited as a Manager in charge of Corporate and Investment Banking in Kumasi. In May 2011, he was appointed a Senior Manager in charge of Soft Commodities and Healthcare within Corporate and Investment Banking at the Stanbic Bank Head office in Accra. He joined Fidelity Bank Ghana Limited in July 2012 as the Head of Corporate Banking for the Northern Sector.In February 2015, he joined Societe Generale Ghana and served as the Deputy Head of Corporate Client Coverage and Head of Corporate Banking.Mr Sarpong was appointed Head of Corporate Client Coverage in September 2022.
Mildred Caesar : Head, Human Resource Management. 
She holds an ACIB from the Chartered Institute of Bankers, 
an MBA in Finance from the University of Ghana, Legon, a BSc (Hons) Planning, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST) and an HR Strategic Leadership certification from the Cornell University. She is a certified HR Manager (CHRM Member) who also holds an International Association of Business and Financial Management(IABFM) certification. She is a professionally qualified SHRM Member and an associate member of IHRMP . Mildred Caesar joined 
Key Management Personnel cont’d
10
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCSociete Generale Ghana from Standard Chartered Bank where 
she worked for over 6 years.  She was the Employee Relations Manager in charge of 5 Countries in West Africa (Cote D’Ivoire, Ghana, Sierra Leone, The Gambia and Cameroun). Prior to this role, she was the Senior Human Resource Business Partner at Standard Chartered Bank for 4 years.  Mildred Caesar has over  23 years’ experience in General Management, Human resource Management, Employee Relations and Finance in various Multinational Organizations. She also worked as the Group Human Resources Manager with Puma Energy Services/UBI Group. She has also worked as the area HR Manager for DHL International and HR Manager at Huawei Technologies.
Frank Lawoe: Head, Internal Audit. A Chartered Accountant 
by profession,he holds a Bachelor of Commerce degree from the University of Cape Coast and Executive MBA in Finance from the University of Ghana. He is also a Member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants (Ghana) and Institute of Internal Auditors (Ghana). He has over 17 years’ experience in banking with strong and proven expertise in Internal Audit, Credit Risk Management, Retail and Corporate Banking, and Debt Recovery. 
Lavana Gwira Tamattey: Head, Permanent Control. She 
holds a degree in Economics & English and a Master of Business Administration (Finance) both from the University of Ghana. She is a banker with thirty years’ experience spanning various departments in Societe Generale Ghana PLC. She has served as Branch Manager for three distinct branches over the years. During the AKOBEN project, which saw the Bank change its banking software from Flexcube to Amplitude from 2007 to 2009, she worked as the Front Office Business Line Manager (Retail Banking). In 2010, she was appointed as Head of Marketing and was responsible for the sale of Institutional Loans, Management of the Contact/Call Centre, Communication on Products & Services, and Branding. Other capacities in which she has worked from 2012 to 2019 include Deputy Head, Retail Credit Monitoring, Head, Retail Credit Administration and Head, Retail Operations.
She was transferred to the Permanent Control Department as 
Head, Operational Risk in December 2019. She was appointed Acting Head of the department in June 2021. She is currently responsible for Operational Risk assessment and management, Level 1 Permanent Control Implementation and Business Continuity Management. She is also entrusted with the responsibility of overseeing the quality of Customer Files within Societe Generale Ghana as defined by the Group and local Regulators. She was appointed as Head Permanent Control on 1 February 2022.Lawrence Ribeiro: Head, Logistics & Support. He holds a 
Post Graduate Diploma in Legal Studies from the Ghana School of Law, Executive Master of Business Administration (Finance option) from the University of Ghana, Legon and BSc Electrical/Electronic Engineering degree from the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology. In the last twenty-two years, he has built extensive experience in enterprise IT management and service delivery. He is also experienced in Logistics and Estate management. He worked in various capacities as Head of Data Centre Operations, Head of Network and System, Head of IT Security and Business Continuity Planning and Head of Information Systems and Technology.
Adwoa Asieduaa Ntirakwa: Head Organisation & Projects.  
She is a product of the University of Ghana Business School 
with a BSc in Banking and Finance and a Master of Business Administration (Project Management Option) from the Ghana Institute of Management and Public Administration. She is also a professionally qualified member of the Chartered Institute of Bankers (Ghana) and is a Lean Six Sigma trained – Green Belt. She is also a coach in Prism Methodology and has trained a number of staff members on the Prism Methodology. Adwoa has 16 years’ experience in Banking in the areas of Retail Banking and Project Management.  In her current role as the Head of Organization and Projects, she is responsible for the Bank’s Project Management Portfolio and Methods/ Procedures, ensuring that Projects are delivered for the Banks Functional Teams in line with their Business strategy.
Elikplim Muzzu: Head, Marketing Multichannels and Quality.  
He holds a Master’s Degree in International Affairs from 
the University of Ghana, Legon’s Centre for International Affairs and Diplomacy in addition to a Master’s Degree in Business Administration from GIMPA. Mr Muzzu is a seasoned, multi-disciplinary marketing management, corporate communications and change management executive with over 22 years proven record of growing lasting brands and managing multi-million dollar projects across Ghana. With a passion for brands, a strong business judgement and interpersonal skills, he has successfully managed many client projects and developed many a successful brands on the local market and in the process, turning these brands into profitable and successful businesses. A consummate professional, he has within the last decade and a half worked within the Ghanaian banking industry and held senior executive roles in United Bank for Africa (UBA) Ghana Limited and First Atlantic Bank Limited, responsible for Marketing, Corporate Communications and Service Quality. He also worked at Barclays Bank Ghana Limited where he served as the Programme Manager for Brand and Name Change during the bank’s brand transition to Absa Bank Ghana Limited. 
Key Management Personnel cont’d
11
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCDistinguished Shareholders, I am delighted to welcome you to 
our 43rd Virtual Annual General Meeting and to present to you the Annual Report and Audited Financial Statements of your Company for the financial year ended 31 December 2022.  Your Company’s financial performance remained solid within the context of a challenging macro-economic enviroment in the year 
• Global Macro-economic Environment
• Operating Environment
• 2022 Operating  Results
• Share Performance
• Board of Directors
• Corporate Governance
• Outlook for 2023
•  Appreciation
Global Macro-economic EnvironmentThe year started with a positive medium-term outlook for the global economy. The negative repercussions of the outbreak of new variants of COVID 19 were expected to diminish, leading the global economy back onto the path of recovery.
However, the Russian invasion into Ukraine in late February 
destabilized the already weakened global economy, worsened its prospects, and set it back into relapse.  Global output had been severely impacted by supply chain bottlenecks in China due to pandemic-related lockdowns. The war exacerbated the problem as supply disruptions of energy, metals and food became more apparent.
Cost of living has also increased further during the year as a 
result of these shocks. In fact, some economies have recorded the highest levels of inflation in over 40 years. In an attempt to control this, central banks have implemented tighter monetary policies which have led to elevated interest rates and its consequent effects on consumption and investment.
The occurrences in the global macro-economic environment 
have had its toll on many emerging and developing economies. For example, the monetary tightening policy in the US and the subsequent sharp appreciation of the US dollar has significantly contributed to the cost-of-living crisis faced in many of these countries.
According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the global 
economy appears poised for a gradual recovery from the powerful blows of the pandemic and of Russia’s unprovoked war on Ukraine. China is rebounding strongly following the reopening of its economy. Simultaneously, the massive and synchronous tightening of monetary policy by most central banks should start to bear fruit, with inflation moving back toward its targets. In its latest forecast, global growth will bottom out at 2.8 percent in 2023 from the estimated 3.4 percent growth in 2022 before rising modestly to 3.0 percent in 2024. Global inflation will decrease, although more slowly than initially anticipated, from 8.7 percent in 2022 to 7.0 percent this year and 4.9 percent in 2024.
Operating Environment
In Ghana, the economy was not spared the shocks of the global external environment. Inflation soared during the year as the pass- through effects of the depreciation of the currency and supply disruptions affected fuel, food and other commodity prices. Headline inflation stood at 54.3 percent at the end of the year compared to 12.6 percent at the same time last year.
The high inflation levels, together with the currency 
depreciation, tighter monetary conditions (high interest rates) and general uncertainty led to low levels of business confidence and private consumption. This led to a moderation of economic growth. The latest data from the Ghana Statistical Service showed an annual Real GDP growth rate of 3.1 percent during the last quarter of the year, compared to 5.4 percent in the previous year.
The depreciation of the Ghana cedi against the major trading 
currencies during the year was due to many interrelated factors. The increase in the US Federal rates as part of monetary tightening policies led to portfolio reversals and exit of non-resident investors from the Ghanaian bond market. This situation was worsened by the Sovereign downgrades of international rating agencies leading eventually to the country being cut off from the international capital market. Locally, the increased demand for foreign currency was fueled mainly by high import bills and general speculation, which led to a preference for foreign currency holdings over Ghana cedi denominated assets. At the end of December, the Ghana cedi had depreciated by 30%, 25% and 21% against the Dollar, Euro and the British Pound respectively. 
Given the general economic conditions and the inflationary 
risks, the central bank embarked on a monetary tightening policy over the course of the year. The Monetary Policy Rate was increased by an overall 12.5 percentage points from 14.5 percent in Dec 2021 to 27 percent in Dec 2022. The money market consequently reflected this in rising interest rates across the entirety of the yield curve. BOARD CHAIR’S STATEMENT
12
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCOn the fiscal side, provisional data shows a higher fiscal 
deficit than originally anticipated due to revenue shortfalls and expenditure overruns. According to the Bank of Ghana, the fiscal deficit as at December 2022 stood at 8.1 percent of GDP against a revised mid-year target of 6.3 percent of GDP . The revenue shortfall was due to challenges inherent in the conceptualization and implementation of new revenue measures, whiles government expenditure increased significantly mainly due to higher interest payments. A majority of the deficit was financed from domestic resources as the country had been practically cut off from international markets after the country’s sovereign rating downgrades. Consequently, the country’s stock of public debt increased to 93.5 percent of GDP as at November 2022, compared with 76.6 percent of GDP at the end of December 2021.  
On the external front, the trade surplus more than doubled this 
year due to a significant growth in export earnings on account of increases in commodity prices relative to the growth in imports. This led to a reduction in the current account deficit. However, the net Capital and Financial Account outflows over the year caused by global and local economic conditions led to an overall Balance of Payments deficit of USD 3.6billion (5 percent of GDP) in 2022 compared with a surplus of USD 510.1 million (0.6 percent of GDP) the previous year, according to the Bank of Ghana.
Developments in the banking sector broadly reflected the 
challenging operating environment in 2022 on account of macroeconomic conditions, and the recent implementation of the Domestic Debt Exchange Programme (DDEP) which all 23 universal banks participated in. According to Bank of Ghana, its preliminary assessment of the impact of the DDEP on the banking sector, based on December 2022 data, indicates significant losses on account of impairment of banks’ holdings in Government of Ghana (GoG) bonds. The impact of DDEP is moderated by the timely introduction of regulatory reliefs by the Bank of Ghana to support the banking sector which led to its key financial soundness indicators to remain broadly sound. Accordingly, the industry’s average CAR adjusted for the regulatory reliefs was 15.7 percent in December 2022, compared to 19.6 percent in the previous year. The adjusted CAR reflected valuation losses on GoG bonds, elevated credit risk, and revaluation losses on foreign currency denominated loans. Asset quality marginally improved, with the industry’s Non-Performing Loans (NPL) ratio at 15.1 percent in December 2022, almost unchanged from 15.2 percent in December 2021, reflecting the higher growth in credit, which outpaced the growth in the NPL stock.
Overall, this year has been very challenging. On July 1, 2022, the 
Government announced its intention to seek support from the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Discussions were held and a staff level agreement was reached in December. It is expected that the IMF program, when approved and implemented will help restore government’s creditworthiness and eventually lead to a regain of access to the international capital markets. The program is also expected to lead to a stronger fiscal and monetary policy framework, which would lead to improved economic conditions and general stability. 
The medium term macro-economic outlook looks promising, 
conditioned on certain key occurrences and actions. In the latest Country Risk Report by Fitch Solutions, Economic growth is projected to decelerate from  3.1 percent in 2022 to 2.9 percent in 2023, but rise to 3.8 percent and 5.7 percent in 2024 and 2025 respectively as current economic conditions ease. The fiscal deficit is also forecasted to narrow to 7.5 percent of GDP in 2023 from 8.1 percent in 2022 as a result of expected implementation of fiscal consolidation efforts during the year. As investor confidence improves and foreign reserves increase due to the IMF program, the exchange rate is expected to stabilize in the coming year. Regarding Inflation, the central bank is expected to continue monetary tightening programs (though at a slower pace) to prevent it from becoming entrenched.
Share Performance
The share price of the Bank for the year under review showed a 17% decline as price fell from GHC 1.2 at the beginning of the year to GHS1.0 at the end of 2022.   
Changes in the Board of Directors: Re-election of Directors
In accordance with Section 60 (1) of the Constitution of the 
Bank, there will be re-election of directors.
Corporate governance
Our Bank is committed to ensuring effective corporate 
governance and sound risk management, which are of fundamental importance in banking business.  The Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992); The Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking Institutions Act 2016 (Act 930); the Bank of Ghana’s Corporate Governance Directive 2018; the Securities Industry Act 2016 (Act 929); the Securities & Exchange Commission the Corporate Governance Code for Listed Companies 2020; The Bank of Ghana Risk Management Directive 2021; the Securities and Exchange Regulations as well as the Continuing Listing Requirements of the Ghana Stock Exchange provide us with the regulatory framework for ensuring effective corporate governance, anti-money laundering and combating financing of terrorism.
Outlook for the year 2023
For the year 2023, we will continue to deepen our stakeholder 
relationships by liaising with our customers, our communities and our regulators.  We will continue to work in close liaison with the Bank of Ghana to strengthen our Regulatory Framework.   
Board Chair’s Statement cont’d
13
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCWe will continue to manage and control all of our risks, that is 
credit, operational, cybersecurity, environmental, compliance and reputational; by strengthening our risk culture, sense of responsibility and ethical behavior. We will aim to achieve the high commercial and financial ambitions; Manage the convergence of our systems, operations, use-cases and processes to streamline our costs over time and deliver an equivalent standard in the Bank; we will keep the customer at the center of our concerns as bankers, while maintaining the principles of ingenuity and pragmatism in the solutions we offer them to increase their satisfaction. We will continue and intensify the refocusing of our activities around Environmental, Social and Governance principles.Acknowledgement
On behalf of the Board of Directors, I wish to express my sincere 
gratitude to all shareholders of Societe Generale Ghana PLC  for your continued support and interest in the Bank  I also extend my appreciation to the Management and staff of our Bank for their untiring efforts during a very difficult year.  My gratitude goes to my colleagues on the Board, I wish to say a heartfelt gratitude to our cherished customers for their unflinching support, loyalty and patronage.  Together we are continuing to build Societe Generale Ghana PLC into the Preferred Banking Institution in Ghana.
Thank you for your attention.
MARGARET BOATENG SEKYERE, 
BOARD CHAIRBoard Chair’s Statement cont’d
14
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCMANAGING DIRECTOR’S REVIEW
I am pleased to share with you the progress and achievements 
made during 2022 and to share with you a review of our operations and the performance of your Company for the year 2022. 
2022 Operating Results
Ghana’s inflation in the year 2022 exceeded its target ending the 
year at 54.1 percent record high. In its wake, monetary policy was tightened and cost of borrowing increased significantly. Regardless of the economic woes in the country, your bank remained resilient and generated a profit before tax of GH¢ 168,384,318. Operating income and operational expenses both recorded a growth of 26% and 8.6%  respectively compared to 2021. 
Despite the prudent risk management procedures employed 
by your bank, the current economic challenges mainly the Debt restructuring programme demanded a 752.3 % increase in NCR compared to 2021. Consequently, Profit After Tax declined by 38%  when compared to the year 2021.
In spite of the sharp decline in our investment book in 2022, 
total assets  recorded an increase of 21.3% compared to the year 2021.
Review of Operations for 2022Human Resources Management
The Human Resources Management function in the year 
2022 provided the needed support for the workforce in the organization during the uncertain economic headwinds in Ghana.
Various strategies were put in place to improve staff engagement 
and ensure continuity in employee productivity.
The key issues were:
 y Appointment of a new Head of HR to strengthen the team.
 y Successful management of projects (HR Online Phase 
2 for Loans and Cash Deposit – Relieving branch staff  on maternity leave – Police Report for all staff - Annual medical screening).
 y Regular engagement between the HR Function and staff  in various departments (Resumption of career interviews, meetings with Heads of Department / Managers)
 y Engagement with Pension Fund managers (Axis & Petra) to educate staff on the benefits of their pension schemes and the impact of the Debt Exchange Programme on Pensions.
 y Retirees Engagement programme  on pension scheme
 y Career Fairs were held at Ashesi and University of Ghana; School for the physically challenged, Legon.
 y Internship opportunities for young people living with special needs in the Head Office as part of the Diversity and Inclusion agenda of the Bank.Corporate coverage departmentThe Ghanaian economy like many other world economies has been significantly impacted by the recent global trends. The bounce back from the COVID pandamic was curtailed following the eruption of the Russian and Ukraine war. The effect of these world events negatively affected many economies especially developing ones whose reliance on agricultural and industrial factors of production from these regions was a key component for economic activity . Inflation soared to record levels, the local currency became one of the worst performing currencies in the world, general cost of doing business increased astronomically, and liquidity was very tight due to the monetary policy stance of the Central Bank and its resultant impact on cost of borrowing. The central bank policy rate increased from 14.5% in January to 27% as at December 2022.
Amid these uncertainties and difficulties, Corporate Coverage 
pragmatically designed solutions aimed at providing the needed support to its clientele. These solutions communicated to our customers that their needs and wellbeing was at the forefront of our operations and that we were poised to ensure the continuity of their businesses amidst the turbulant economic environment. Though 2022 was a difficult year, it sparked our innovation, agility, and proactivity such that despite the economic downturn, the business in real terms (discounting the impact of depreciation) exceeded its loans & advances and net banking income budget for the year 2022. There was strong growth on all the product lines namely; Overdraft, Term loans, factoring and leasing. The growth in our stock of advances coupled with a high interest rate regime propelled the achievement of our set targets for 2022.
Amidst these challenges, we project 2023 with reference to 
Ghana, to be one with high inflation, a currency under continued pressure, lack of liquidity because of the government’s domestic debt exchange program and a general lack of trust in the financial sector. These head winds require that we are selective in our credit underwriting processes underpinned by strong post disbursement monitoring, intentional in our sectors of active focus (continued support for the critical sectors of the 
15
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCManaging Director’s review cont’d
Ghanaian economy: Agriculture, Pharmaceuticals, Mining, Oil 
and Gas) and excellent customer service delivery anchored on technology, unique and bespoke solution, speed to market and professionalism.
Retail banking 
The year under review started quite well; with average interest rates at a good level (between 18% and 22%), and the Covid impact and pressures behind us.  We therefore had a good run, in terms of loan production during the first half of the year.  Year-on-year, production for the first half witnessed a 17% growth. This was quite impressive coming on the back of a year where production had slowed down considerably.  However, the good times did not last, as we started experiencing some significant deterioration in the macro-economic environment, which led to rate increments on both policy rate and GRR, with a negative impact on interest rates charged on loans.   Within a space of three months, interest rates increased by over a 1000 basis points, leading to a virtual halt in loan production.  Between the third and fourth quarter, we were producing less than half the level we did during the first half of the year.Also, as a result of government’s expanded appetite to raise funds through T-bills, liquidity became an issue since several depositors were attracted to the relatively high rates offered on government instruments.  We therefore had to respond with various targeted deposit campaigns which covered all segments of Retail clients; Affluent, Mass Affluent and Mass Market.  Despite these challenges, we ended the year well by growing our loan and deposit stock by.  This is a testament to our business model and the resilience of our teams.In addition to the above results, Retail also worked on the following during the year:
1. New Relationship Model (NRM)
This is a project initiated and supported by the Regional Office of AFO, and it is aimed at repositioning the network to focus on driving value for the business.  SGGH, in collaboration with the Hub Marketing Team at the Regional Office, commenced piloting the New Relationship Model in three branches for six months with a staggered roll-out approach scheduled for May 2023. The New Relationship Model focuses on growing the business through effective portfolio management with the introduction of a Customer Relationship Officer  (CRO) and a Customer Service Officer (CSO) roles to manage Mass Affluent clients and Mass Market clients respectively.
2. Deposit Campaigns
As part of the bank’s strategy to constantly work on our liquidity position and address the deposit challenges the bank faced in Q3 and Q4 - 2022, three deposit campaigns were embarked on to enable us to attract and retain stable deposits.  These campaigns helped Retail Business to achieve its budgeted deposits for the year.  The strategy and focus will continue in 2023.3. Periodic Review & Bulk Account Closure We continued with the Periodic Review Exercise in 2022.  This is now a yearly activity structured to meet a few regulatory requirements as well as group policies.  This exercise which we earlier struggled with has now become routine and well understood by our teams.  A good working knowledge and capacity has been built over the past couple of years which now allows us to deliver on the expectations.  We successfully completed the exercise by the end of the year achieving 100%, placing SGGH well among its peers.We also begun an exercise the previous year to clean the portfolio by closing all inactive, non-operated accounts which has contributed to a poor account activity ratio for SGGH.  As at end of the year, we had closed over 103,000 accounts.  This has helped improve the active account ratio from a low point of 48% to now 56%.   The exercise continues in 2023.
4. Overdraft Product
During the year under review, we piloted the rollout of our overdraft product to a selected group of salaried workers in the Affluent and Mass Affluent segments.  This exercise went well, produced decent results and some valuable lessons which will now form part of the building blocks for Industrialization of Overdrafts across the network.  Approximately 500 files were 
booked for over GH¢ 3.2 Million.
Treasury and Global Markets
SG Ghana’s financial market operations gained more depth in 2022 with regards to product penetration, trading volumes and market share. Core to the Treasury strategy was the prudent management of the Bank’s Balance Sheet risks and prudential ratios. This resulted in a very strong and resilient Balance Sheet position, despite turbulent environment.SG Ghana’s Treasury remains poised to provide appropriate hedges and solutions for its own book and that of its cherished customers.
Organization and projects
Organization and Projects continues to play a strong role in managing and coordinating various projects that seek to promote efficiency in banking operations and improve customer experience.In the year under review, the Bank upgraded its Internet Banking Platform for Corporate Customers and piloted this with five Clients. We also deployed the Visa Consumer Authentication Services (VCAS) for the automatic enrollment of the E-commerce functionality on all SGGH Cards in addition to the E-commerce Acquiring Services for our Corporate Clients.The Local Regulator approved for the Bank to offer Mortgage Loan Services to our Retail Clients .The mobile banking application of the Bank, (SG Connect) has been enhanced with SMS and Email Alerts where customers receive notifications on transactions performed on their Accounts.The Automated Teller Machines of the bank have also been reconfigured to accept and issue GHIPSS GHLink EMV cards.   
16
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCManaging Director’s review cont’d
The Bank deployed Offline and Online Verification Devices 
for identification of customers when performing banking transactions in the banking halls.
Information Technology
Information Security continues to be key for your Bank in the year under review. The Bank successfully undertook the ISO/IEC 27001:2013 surveillance audit in June 2022 as required by the ISO/IEC 27001 standard and the Bank of Ghana Cyber and  Information Security Directive: 2018. This is an indication that Information Security Management System (ISMS) of SG Ghana remain aligned with international information security best practices.Your Bank continued to improve the resilience and stability of our IT systems within the year under review.  We ensured full compliance with the Regulator by enrolling on the E-Levy and Ghana Card Verification solutions. We also enhanced our Card with E-commerce functionalities which enabled our card holders to make transaction online by default.
Operational Risk and Permanent Control
The Permanent Control department, a major stakeholder of the Internal Control system of SGGH, has oversight responsibility for Operational Risk, Business Continuity, Branch Permanent Supervision, Managerial Supervision and KYC Quality Assurance. For the year under review, Permanent Control with the performance of the annual Risk control self-assessment exercise ensured that risks that are inherent in daily banking operations were identified, analyzed, measured, monitored, and managed within the Bank’s risk appetite . The necessary mitigations and controls were implemented to improve the internal controls of the Bank and ultimately reduce fraud and minimize operational losses. As part of its mandate for the year 2022, the department  deepened risk sensitization by undertaking various face to face and virtual training on fraud identification and prevention as well as the  identification and management of operational incidents to forestall losses. Additionally, the deployment of a tool for monitoring Key Risk Indicators (KRI) ensured that these indicators were closely monitored to anticipate developments that could pose operational risks and enable appropriate remedial action to be taken promptly. To ensure that all risks are adequately captured and monitored, some of the thresholds were reviewed while additional indicators were introduced, especially for activities whose risk exposures were rated high.
Regarding KYC Quality Assurance, the onboarding exercise was 
improved with the adoption of a structured checklist for the performance of quality assurance checks, thereby increasing the quality of  Client files in  the Bank’s database.  This ensured that Know Your Customer (KYC) directives and Anti Money Laundering (AML) guidelines were complied with to prevent fraud, money laundering and financing of terrorist activities. Crisis Management and Business Continuity Plans were quite resolute in ensuring that when we had issues that would normally  have disrupted our business such as fire outbreaks, appropriate pre-determined actions  were implemented  to ensure that business was not disrupted. We are continuously working to test and improve the BCP strategy further by performing  Business Impact Analysis on activities of the Bank to identify vital and critical activities as well as IT applications for recovery in event of crisis or disaster. The department continued with the monitoring of the Risk, Operational and Financial impacts of Outsourced Service Providers in the scope of their service provision and relation with the Bank. In this regard, an extensive review of the Contracts, Business Continuity Plans, and Service Level Agreements were performed to ensure that they met the Bank’s requirements and tolerance levels.Permanent Control will continue to deploy and implement the needed controls, training, and tools to deepen the Internal Control of the Bank to provide a sound and secure Banking environment for all our stakeholders.
Marketing, Multi-Channel and Quality Review
In 2022, the MMQ Department continued with its support for the Business through the delivery of a host of new initiatives, innovations, synergies, and partnerships. The department ensured that the Business was provided with regularly updated market intelligence and customer insight for effective decision making. 
To improve the quality of our service delivery to our customers, 
the department in collaboration with its internal stakeholders launched the Process Optimization Project. As part of our continuous monitoring of the quality of our service, three surveys were conducted to obtain customer feedback.The recruitment of a Community and Brands Manager during the year saw a significant growth in the Bank’s digital and social media presence while ensuring brand consistency and standardization across the network.
Several initiatives and campaigns were deployed to support 
the business, some of which are listed below.
Campaigns: 
1. Easter Loans Campaign was the major loans campaign executed by the Bank for 2022. This product achieved high results with most of the contributing branches exceeding their set targets. A net result of 79.2% of overall target was achieved.  The campaign was heavily driven by external communications and some staff incentives.
2. Travel Now Pay Later a consumer asset finance product offer 
was launched in collaboration with Adansi Travel and DUKAB AB in July 2022. This exciting offer is designed to cover tour packages and tickets 
17
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC3. Visa Card Cash Back Campaign saw over 2000 customers 
rewarded with cash amounts totaling more than GH¢237,000 and 315 customers given free visa classic cards. 
Initiatives:
4. The relaunch of the SG Home of Business center in July 2022 
under the theme ‘Developing Business through Partnerships’ reemphasized the Bank’s commitment to continuously support local businesses. 
5. The Bank’s new Boafo Loan product was launched for 
Accra in June 2022. This Loan product is a short-term working capital loan package designed to address the needs of MSMEs. 
Businesses can access up to GH¢600,000.00 with a repayment 
period of one (1) year without the typical collateral as mostly required.
6. In 2022, the SG Innov8 HUB achieved several key milestones 
that had a visible impact on the Bank’s customers and brand positioning. Overall, these achievements demonstrated the Bank’s commitment to innovation, sustainability, and customer satisfaction. Amongst others, the Hub sign an MOU with the United Nation Development Program (UNDP) in June to help scale start-ups and this enabled the Bank to support small businesses and drive economic growth.
7. The International Customer Service Week was celebrated 
under the theme ‘Celebrate Service’ . The bank wide celebration 
recognized best service staff and the best customers in terms of profitability and loyalty (longest serving) for each branch. The overall best customers were treated to lunch with the Deputy Managing Director, Business and Retail Management team. 
8. Fathers’ Day Campaign. This social media activation was 
used to drive engagement between the Bank, its customers, and the public. Customers shared stories about their most memorable experiences with their fathers and the top 3 entries with the highest social media engagements were treated to dinner at a plush hotel. The campaign reached over 5 million accounts on twitter and created some much-needed online visibility for the Bank in June 2022.
Corporate Social Responsibility  
Environmental transition has been prioritized in the bank’s CSR ambition and as a group, various projects and actions have been taken to build together with our clients a better and sustainable future for energy sobriety and to strengthen our responsible employer policy. We continue the roadmap to halving our direct carbon footprint by 2030. In the year under review, Sustainable development and Environmental and Social governance has been subsumed into CSR with a senior manager appointed to manage the space. Albeit the notion of sustainable development has been with us since the 1980s, it is now more than ever at the heart of our mission. The Group’s new CSR ambition is leading us to accelerate the decarbonisation of our business portfolios (financing and insurance), and commitment to protecting biodiversityWe are reminded that sustainability is when we meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs, a United Nations report, the Brundtland report’
Throughout the Group, the ENEA Climate Energy Transition 
project has been launched and Ghana was no exception. The project has been phased out and the Bank has successfully completed all the required milestones for the first phase which is  1. Recruitment or appointment of a Sustainable Development Champion at senior managerial level to be responsible for all topics on sustainability
2. Identify potential clients within the existing client portfolio 
for energy transition
3. Training to commence engagements with clients on their 
sustainability journey and energy transition maturity levels 
The ENEA strategy can be categorised into four main pillars 
Strategy 
 y Decarbonization - Define ambitious sectoral perspectives 
for decarbonization by qualifying the potential for CAPEX financing in the region
 y Business Strategy - Define revenue growth trajectories by sector under climate constraints (stress tests, EU taxonomy, etc.) and/or compatible with NZBA commitments/trajectories
 y Defining ambitious sectoral perspectives for decarbonization by qualifying the potential for Capex financing in the region and to define revenue growth trajectories by sector 
Client and Assets
 y Existing clients - Support teams in prioritizing the portfolio (questionnaire) and engaging high value clients (pitch)
 y New clients - Identify « Emerging Leaders » and support their portfolio onboarding
 y Strategic assets - Support pro-active origination once key assets/sectors have been identified
Products and Offers
 y Innovative offerings - Supporting the development of differentiated and integrated offerings on key assets
 y Risk and DD - Define standardized DD approaches for certain assets and associated risk management strategyManaging Director’s review cont’d
18
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCManaging Directors Review cont’d
 y Transactions - Complement AFMO’s capabilities on 
certain transactions (e.g., Small-scale M&A / Equity raising Supporting the development of differentiated and integrated offerings on key assets (Risk and Transactions)
Organisation and Resources 
 y Training - Deploy an ambitious training program for transition “experts” and commercial teams
 y Coordination with other BU’s to leverage projects and initiatives
On sponsorship and donations, the Bank supported diverse community initiatives and projects in education, healthcare, environment, and community development. The Bank strategically positioned its public relations activities in line with the UN’s sustainable development goals specifically zeroing in on Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6, which addresses water inadequacies and supply disruptions; one of the most important COVID 19 prevention measures.  The bank in partnership with World Vision International constructed and commissioned two boreholes in Wiawso and Kona Communities in the Ashanti Region to address water deprivation issues. This initiative also has the potential to improve the academic performance of students of the community who will now spend more time in the classroom instead of trekking long distances in search of portable water.  
In the community, the Bank proved to be socially responsive by 
supporting the Homowo Festival and the Gbetse Mantse with provisions and other items. The Bank showed further solidarity on the social front by its donations to Tobinco,Juaben and Boamponsem Funerals .
On the corporate front, the Bank sponsored the CCIF gala night 
event; a corporate initiative that brings together businesses in the French community for networking. In addition, the Bank supported the SDG Goals on health and Education as well as Innovation evidence by sponsorship and donations to the CSIR Food and Agric Organization (FAO) of the UN in the category of innovative product in the food chain. In Education and literacy sponsorships went out to the Winneba University Hall week(French Proficiency Quiz), Alliance Francophone and Alliance Hall week activities just to mention a few. The Bank also made some donations to the Orphanage and in sports partly sponsored The Move for Youth( A health initiative organized globally to encourage team building) . 
Due to the unforeseeable economic downturn of the country 
and the world at large, the bank had to wind down on spending. The CSR unit was thus unable to utilize all the   allocated budget for the year. Going forward, the CSR approach is to proactively outline and determine its projects and spend ahead of the year. An agreed percentage of the budget will be kept to respond to CSR requests that come in adhoc outside the planned initiatives. For the year ahead, donations will be towards supporting green and biodiversity projects. The Bank will continue to work with World Vision on some common initiatives such as was done last year.A 9 member CSR committee has been constituted to discuss proposals and a yearly CSR strategy which is to guide spending each year. The committee’s input is to reflect their business development needs from a CSR perspective which is in line with the current policy of the group for CSR We will continue to work on sustainability topics and projects together with the region to meet the milestones set for each subsidiary.
Compliance
The Compliance Department of Societe Generale Ghana has remained pivotal in ensuring that, despite the ever-changing trends in the industry, the Bank, its stakeholders and staff  are continually guided and focused in ensuring regulatory requirements, ethical standards and professional conduct are maintained at high standards. SG Ghana offers as its reputation, and as one of its unique selling points, a culture which respects and offers continued adherence to local and international regulations. 
This assures our valued clients of the security of their investments 
and operations especially in these turbulent financial times. This also minimizes the risk of regulatory sanctions and guarantees the ease of business in the international markets, resulting in sustainability and growth of the investments of the bank’s shareholders, clients and partners. The Compliance Department continues to play an essential role in deepening the compliance culture in the Bank and ensuring adherence to Internal and external regulations. The department will continue to focus on key compliance issues within the scope of Financial Crime and Regulatory Compliance topics to meet its mandate within the existing framework of the bank. AppreciationI would like to thank the Board, Management, Staff and all stakeholders for efforts made in 2022. I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to Executive Committee members for all the hard work undertaken during the year.  I would like to end by thanking again, the Board of Directors, Management and every member of staff for their individual and collective contribution to the organic growth of the Bank during a very difficult year.     
Hakim Ouzzani
MANAGING DIRECTOR
19
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCThe Directors in submitting to the shareholders the financial statements of the Bank for the year ended 31 December 2022 report 
as follows:-  2022 2021
  GH¢  GH¢ 
 The Bank recorded net profit before taxation  168,384,317          281,966,699   
 From which is deducted taxation of     (59,544,391)  (97,637,066)
 
 Giving a net profit after taxation of     108,839,926          184,329,633   
 There was transfer to statutory reserves of    (27,209,982)   (46,082,408)
 Leaving a profit for the year after taxation and transfer to statutory reserves of      81,629,944          138,247,225   
 When added to the opening balance on the income surplus account as of 1 January of    207,312,183        149,907,074   
 From which is deducted final dividend paid of   (48,386,529)   (80,842,116)
 It leaves a closing balance on the retained earnings account of       240,555,598          207,312,183  
Statement of directors’ responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing financial statements 
for each financial period, which give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the bank at the end of the period and of the profit or loss of the bank for that period. In preparing those financial statements, the directors are required to: 
 y Select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently.
 y Make judgments and estimates that are reasonable and prudent.
 y State whether applicable accounting standards have been followed subject to any material departures, disclosed and explained in the financial statements.
 y Prepare the financial statements on a going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for ensuring that the company keeps accounting records which disclose with reasonable accuracy the financial position of the company and which enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Bank and Specialized Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) and International Financial Reporting Standards.  They are responsible for safeguarding the assets of the bank and hence for taking steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.  
The above statement should be read in conjunction with the statement of the auditors’ responsibilities on page 47, which 
is made with a view to distinguishing, for shareholders, the respective responsibilities of the Directors and the Auditors in relation to the financial statements 
Objective of the company and nature of business
Societe Generale Ghana PLC is a public limited liability company incorporated under the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992).   The company which is a Bank is listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange and is registered with the Ghana Investment Promotion Centre.   The Company is licenced by the Bank of Ghana as a Universal Bank (Class 1 No 215) in Ghana under the Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2016( Act 930).
Holding company
The Societe Generale Group through its wholly owned investment subsidiary SG Financial Services Holding owns 60.22% of the issued capital of the Company, thus making Societe Generale Ghana PLC a subsidiary of the Societe Generale Group.
Investments  
SSB Investments Limited, a company incorporated in Ghana to manage the equity investments of the Bank is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company.  The nature of the business which the company is authorized to carry on are:-
 y to carry on the business of an investment company and for that purpose to acquire and hold either in the name of the company or in that of  any nominee, shares, stocks, debentures, bond notes and securities issues; SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC 
REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS 
20
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
 y to take over and manage all investments of the Bank; 
 y to do all such other things which may seem to the 
company’s directors to be incidental or conducive to the achievement of the objects.
With change in ownership of the Company, the Bank in 2003 indicated its intention to disinvest in SSBI in line with its policy and strategy, to liquidate SSBI and refocus on core business.  The directors of SSBI at the time by a resolution dated 6 August 2003 resolved that the entire portfolio of investments held by SSBI be disposed off.  Over time all the investments held by the company were sold off. 
The proceeds of the sale of the investments were credited to 
the Bank as SSBI is 100% owned by Societe Generale Ghana PLC.  SSBI has been inactive for a long time now since almost all of the investments which were held under it had been sold.  
In order to comply with Section 73 (3) of the Banks and 
Specialized Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2016( Act 930) which provides that a Bank or Specialized Deposit Taking institution shall not invest or hold investments in the share capital of a body corporate other than a subsidiary of that bank or specialized deposit taking institution that represents more than 5% interest in the body corporate, the following action was taken.  
The Board of Directors of the Bank at a meeting held at Yaoundé 
in Cameroun on 1 December, 2017 notice of which had been duly given, authorized the transfer of its 10% shares in Advans Ghana Savings & Loans to SSBI(shareholding stands at 6.22% as at 31 December 2022).  
The certificate for the transfer of Shares to SSBI was obtained 
in 2018. To achieve full convergence with Act 930, the Bank is currently working on operationalizing SSBI to comply with IFRS and Regulatory Reporting. 
The Bank has therefore put in place processes to make SSBI 
operational and functional in order to be able to use it as a vehicle to hold all its other investments that exceed the regulatory 5% threshold.
On 4 November 2019, the re-registration process was completed 
at the Registrar Generals Department and SSBI was issued with a Registration Number CS241862019; a Tax Identification Number C003107913X, a Certificate of Incorporation and a Certificate to Commence Business.  An application is pending with the Bank of Ghana seeking their approval to fully operationalize SSBI.   
 Stated capitalThe Bank has complied with the minimum stated capital 
requirement for universal banking as directed by the Bank of GhanaChanges in Board of Directors and Senior Management
Re-election of Directors    
In accordance with Section 60 (1) of the Constitution of the Bank, there will be re-election of directors.
Changes in Senior Management
 y Mr Kwame Abbey  was appointed Deputy Managing 
Director in charge of Operations and Support Functions. 
 y Mr Pierre Glemot was appointed Chief Risk Officer.
 y Mrs Mildred Caesar was appointed Head, Human Resource Management.
 y Mr Daniel Sarpong  was appointed Head, Corporate Coverage.
All the said appointments were duly approved by the Bank of Ghana
Directors’ InterestNone of the Directors had a material interest in any contract of 
significance with the Bank during the year.
Interest RegisterThe Board of Directors duly approved a Conflict of Interest 
Policy.
 The Directors  maintain an up-to-date register for 
documenting and managing conflict of interest situations in the Company.  During the year no interest was registered.
Building the Capacity of Directors
There were steps taken to build the capacity of the Directors 
to discharge their duties during the year. These include participation in training and capacity building sessions organised by the National Banking College on Corporate Governance. The dates for the training sessions were 10  January 2023, 11 January 2023 and 12 January 2023.  The Directors were also trained by the Chief Compliance Officer on Anti-Money Laundering and Combatting Financing of Terrorism during the year.
Dividend
No Dividends will be declared during the period under review.
Bonus Shares
There has been no proposal for the issue of bonus shares during 
the year under review. 
21
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Environmental Social Governance
Introduction Societe Generale Ghana PLC (SG) is a subsidiary of the Societe Generale Group. The bank considers the banking and financial sector as an essential contributor to economic development and is committed to conducting its activities in a responsible way. This report highlights the bank’s commitment to sustainable development and the progress made in implementing its policies and procedures.
Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMS) 
Societe Generale Ghana PLC established the Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMS) General Guidelines in 2013, with a focus on the economic, environmental, and social consequences and impacts of its activities. In July 2014, the Board of Directors approved the Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMS) Policy, which has been in operation with the latest update to the policy approved and published in December 2021. The ESMS General Principles stem from the legal and regulatory framework applicable to the Bank’s activities and are implemented through processes and procedures adapted to the different activities of the Bank.
Sustainable Banking Principles 
Societe Generale Ghana signed the Central Bank of Ghana’s Sustainable Banking Principles in November 2019 and has since taken important steps towards implementing these principles and improving upon existing policies and procedures. The Bank has the policies, governance bodies, and responsible individuals in place for implementing these Principles.
Principle 1: Identify, measure, mitigate and monitor 
environmental and social risks in business activities. Identify environmental and social opportunities in business activities The Bank has met the requirements of Principle 1. With a trained team on E&S, the bank continued its efforts in identifying, measuring and mitigating E&S risks of clients through Credit appraisals, backed by an industry-standard ESMS Policy and Procedure.
Principle 2: Promote good environmental, social and 
governance practices in internal business operations.The ESG team in Societe Generale Ghana PLC was strengthened by the creation and introduction of a Head, CSR and Sustainable Development. There is a clear reporting line on E&S, with an annual report submitted to the Board of Directors.Principle 3: Promote good corporate governance and ethical standardsThe governance framework forms an integral part of the Bank’s structure, and comprises a number of different tools and structures at various levels of the Bank’s hierarchy i.e.. The Board, a  Corporate Governance System and Board Charter, he Compliance Framework, the Audit Charter, the Credit Risk Committee, the Operational Risk Committee, the Human Resource Committee on Remuneration, the New Products Committee and the Bank’s Internal Regulations.The bank has policies and procedures that tackle anti-bribery, corruption, Code of conduct and an instruction on Gifts, Business Meals, and External Events.
Principle 4: Promote gender equality
There has been a conscious effort over the years to promote gender quality in all departments and hierarchies of the bank. In order to put the Diversity and Inclusion Policy of the bank into action, the bank decided to start working with persons with Special Needs and as at end of year 2022, Societe Generale Ghana PLC had 3 staff with Special Needs. To build capacity, among interested staff on Sign Language, a training is expected to start in Q2 2023.
Table showing Gender representation across the Organizational 
Hierarchy
Level   Female Male Total
Board             44%          56%  100%          
Executive Mgt  44% 56% 100%
Senior Mgt  26% 74% 100%
Middle Mgt  43% 57% 100%
General Staff   44% 56% 100%
   Principle 5: Promote financial inclusion
To promote Financial Inclusion, the bank has a key focus on women, as we identify the financing gap between women and men. To this end, the bank is developing a Market Segment and Classification for women-led businesses. This is under development and seeks to increase access to funds by women-led businesses. To date three capacity building progammes have been organized to support women entrepreneurs with information on doing business right and to sample opinion on the expectation of a woman dedicated account /market segment.
Principle 6: Promote resource efficiency and sustainable 
consumption and productionSG has several commitments including but not limited to biodiversity, deforestation, and the Paris agreement. To achieve this, the bank embarked on a program through an international strategy and consultancy to strengthen the support offered to its customers on their energy and climate transition and other environmental issues. To adopt a cleaner (Green) and efficient source of energy the bank has a solar project at the head office building. The project is a 267 Kwp Hybrid PV Plant mounted carport structures covering 1610m3 area . SG’s project upon completion has seen a significant decline in the Carbon monoxide emission which was a residue of burning crude from standby Generators.
22
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Principle 7: Reporting
In terms of Reporting, the bank currently reports to International Financial Institutions, as may be applicable, and the Bank of Ghana through these 7 Principles on Sustainable Banking. This current publication in our Annual Report is the new normal and Societe Generale Ghana PLC, will continue to improve on this and public disclosures regarding Environmental and Social Performance.
Progress Made in 2022 
During the past year (2022), Societe Generale Ghana continued to engage with its clients, assisting and advising on sustainability issues. The bank appointed a new Head effective July 2022, with the responsibility for overseeing the bank’s journey to a more sustainable practice. The scope covers Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), Sustainable Development, and Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMS). These steps will further help Societe Generale Ghana in creating the needed synergy between CSR and lending activities, in terms of Sustainable Banking.Conclusion Societe Generale Ghana PLC considers the economic, environmental, and social consequences and impacts of its activities and is committed to conducting its activities in a responsible way. The bank has made significant progress in implementing its Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMS) and Sustainable Banking Principles. These efforts have enhanced risk management procedures, protected value creation over the long term, and unlocked additional strategic opportunities for the entire business community in Ghana.
We will continue building together with our clients, a better 
and sustainable future through responsible and innovative financial solutions. 
23
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
24
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC
Corporate Governance Report
Corporate Governance Directive by Bank of GhanaThe Corporate Governance Directive 2018 issued by the Bank of Ghana under the powers conferred by Sections 56 and 92 of the Banks and Specialized Deposit Taking Institutions Act ,2016 (Act 930) requires Regulated Financial Institutions to adopt sound corporate governance principles and best practices to enable them under take their licensed business in a sustainable manner; to promote the interest of depositors and other stakeholders by enhancing corporate performance and accountability of the Regulated Financial Institutions; and to promote and maintain public trust and confidence in Regulated Financial Institutions by prescribing sound corporate governance standards which are critical to the proper functioning of the banking sector and the economy as a whole.  The Bank of Ghana issued the Corporate Governance Disclosure Requirements in May 2022.
Sound Corporate Governance Standards
The Board of Directors of the Bank have overall responsibility for the Company including approving and overseeing the implementation of the strategic objectives, risk strategy, corporate governance and corporate values. The Board is responsible for appointing and providing oversight of Senior Management. These responsibilities are set out in the formal Charter of the Board.  The updated Board Charter was duly approved by members on 2 December 2021 with updates done in 2022.  The Board ensures that a well-structured and rigorous selection system is in place for the appointment of Key Management Personnel through the Recruitment Policy of the Bank and the Board validates the nominations of Key Management Personnel prior to submitting same to the Bank of Ghana for approval.
Annual certification
In compliance with Bank of Ghana’s Corporate Governance Directive for certification within 90 days, at the beginning of each financial year, the Board of Directors of the Company certify general compliance with the Directive. The Board further certifies that:
i. the Board has independently assessed and documented 
the corporate governance process of the Bank and has generally achieved its objectives;
 ii. the Directors are aware of their responsibilities to the Bank as persons charged with governance.
 iii. the Board further confirms that it shall report any material deficiencies and weaknesses that have been identified in the course of the year along with action plans and timetables for the corrective action by the Board to the Bank of Ghana.
 iv. the Board of Directors have received training by the Ghana National Banking College on Governance and Directors Responsibilities for 2022.The Securities and Exchange Commission Ghana (“SEC”) Corporate Governance Code 2020The SEC Ghana issued a Corporate Governance Code on 8 October 2020. The Code applies to all companies whose securities are listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange (“GSE”). Societe Generale Ghana PLC, a company that is listed on the GSE, had to comply with the Code by October 2021.  With the implementation of the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive 2018, the Bank is already compliant with most of the sections of the SEC Code.  The Board Charter was updated on 2 December 2021. It will be  published on the Bank’s website.  The role and responsibilities of the Board as spelt out in the Code is described in the Board Charter. The Board appointments policy and remuneration policy shall also be in the Board Charter. The Board shall reflect the company’s broad shareholding structure.  The Board shall identify one independent Non-Executive director who shall be responsible for relations with minority shareholders.No person shall hold more than 3 directorships in any listed company at any one time.  All directors shall be required to submit themselves for re-election. The Board shall adopt a clear succession plan for its Chair and Chief Executive Officer and other senior executive officers.Independent Non-Executive Directors shall be required to chair all Board Committees.  The Chairman of the Audit Committee shall be a Chartered Accountant.The Board shall appoint a person with responsibility for relations with investors. This person shall have the resources necessary to fulfil his/her function. The investor relations officer may have other duties. The investor relations officer shall be the first point of contact between investors and the company. He or she shall be responsible for providing financial and non-financial information to investors, financial analysts and their representatives in a timely and accurate way. The investor relations officer shall also be responsible for reporting investor concerns to the Board and ensuring that the statutory provisions as well as the provisions stipulated in SEC Corporate Governance Code, regarding communications with investors and shareholders are met.
Compliance with the Securities & Exchange Commission 
Ghana Corporate Governance Code Societe Generale Ghana PLC, a Company that is listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange had to comply with the Code by 8 October 2021.  With the implementation of the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive 2018, the Bank is already compliant with most of the sections of the SEC Corporate Governance Code.  However, a gap analysis has revealed that Societe Generale Ghana is compliant with 265 out of 298 actions.  As at 31 December 2022 the Bank is working on achieving compliance with 33 actions.  The Compliance rating is approximately 97% and the Bank is working on achieving 100% convergence with the SEC Corporate Governance Code.
Report of the Directors cont’d
25
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC
Report of the Directors cont’d
Business strategy
The Board approves and monitors the overall business strategy of the Bank taking into account long-term financial interest of the company, its exposure to risk and its ability to manage risk effectively. The Board approves and oversees the formulation and implementation of the:-
 y overall risk strategy, including its risk tolerance/appetite;
 y policies for risk, risk management and compliance, including anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism risk;
 y internal controls system;
 y corporate governance framework, principles and 
 corporate values including a code of conduct 
 y compensation system
Duty of care and loyaltyThe members of the Board exercise a duty of care, duty of loyalty and other duties of Directors to the Company at all times which is stipulated in the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Constitution  of the Company.
Corporate culture and values
The Board has established a corporate culture and values for 
the Company that promote and reinforce norms for responsible and ethical behaviour in terms of the Bank’s risk awareness, risk-taking and risk management.  The Company has in place a Code of Conduct; a Conflict of Interest Policy, Code of Conduct on Anti Bribery and Corruption Policy duly approved by the Board of Directors.
To promote sound corporate culture in the Company, the 
Board has taken the lead and established the tone at the top by setting and adhering to corporate values for itself, key management and employees that create expectations that business should be conducted in a legal and ethical manner at all times; and ensuring that appropriate steps are taken to communicate throughout the Company, the corporate values, professional standards it sets together with supporting policies and appropriate sanctions for unacceptable behaviours.
Related party transactions
The Board ensures that transactions with related parties 
including internal group transactions are reviewed to assess risk and are subject to appropriate restrictions by requiring that such transactions are conducted on non-preferential terms basis and applicable legislation and other requirements exposure limits for loans to related parties and staff.
Plan for succession
The Board has duly approved a succession plan. The succession plan was approved by the Board in 2020. It will be reviewed in the year 2023. The succession plan focuses on developing human resources to enable the Company to retain a pool of qualified candidates who are ready to compete for key positions and areas when they become vacant to ensure effective continuity of the Bank. 
Key management oversight
The Board provides oversight of Senior Management as part of the Company’s checks and balances and 
a. monitors and ensures the actions of Senior Management 
through reports from Management  consistent with the strategy and policies approved by the Board, including the risk tolerance appetite and risk culture;  
b. meets regularly with Senior Management through the Board sub committees;
c. questions and reviews critically explanations and information provided by senior management;
d. ensures that the knowledge and expertise of senior management remain appropriate given the nature of the business and the Bank’s risk profile;
e. oversees the implementation of appropriate governance framework for the Company;
f. ensures that appropriate succession plans are in place for senior management positions;
g. oversees the design and operation of the Company’s compensation system, monitor and reviews the system to ensure that it is aligned with the desired risk culture and risk appetite of the Company.
h. approves the overall internal control framework of the Company and monitors its effectiveness.
Separation of powersThere is a clear division of responsibilities at the top hierarchy of the Company.  The positions of the Board Chair and the Managing Director are separate. The two top positions of Board Chair and Managing Director in the company are not both  occupied by foreigners.  The Chairman is a Ghanaian National and the Managing Director is a French National.  Further no two related persons occupy the positions of Board Chair and Managing Director of the Company. 
Independent Directors
The Board has four Independent Non-Executive Directors. The Board Chair, the Audit & Accounts Committee Chairman, the Risk Committee Chair and the Independent Directors Chair. The final determination of the Independence of a Board of Director rests with the Bank of Ghana.  However, the Board of Directors will ensure that an Independent director shall be non-executive and shall not:-
a. hold cross directorship positions with another director on 
the Board of other institutions;
26
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
b. be a director on the Board of an institutional shareholder 
with significant equity interest in the Regulated Financial Institution;
c. have more than 5% equity interest directly or indirectly in the Company or in its related companies;
d. be employed in an executive position in the Company or its related company at least two (2) years prior to his appointment date;
e. have relatives employed by the Company or any of its  related companies as Key Management Personnel in the last two (2) years;
f. have engaged in any transaction within the last two (2) years with the Company  on terms that are less favourable to the Company  than those normally offered to other persons; or
g. have served as a director in the Company  continuously for more than two (2) terms unless the director can affirm that his/her independence is not impaired;
h. be related to persons with significant shareholding in the Company or have any business or employment connections to a significant shareholder. 
Board qualifications and composition
Board members have the requisite qualification as Directors 
of a leading Financial Institution in Ghana  listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange.  The National Banking College have trained the Board of Directors on Corporate Governance.  The Board were also trained internally on Compliance, Anti Money Laundering, Combatting Financing of Terrorism and Anti Bribery and Corruption by the Chief Compliance Officer of the Bank.
The Board of Directors have a clear understanding of their 
role in corporate governance and are  able to exercise sound and objective judgment about the affairs of the Company. They possess, individually and collectively, appropriate experience, competencies and personal qualities, including professionalism and integrity.
The competencies of Boards are diverse to facilitate effective 
oversight of Management and shall cover a blend of Banking, Law, Finance, Accounting, Economics, Business Administration, Financial Analysis, Risk Management, Strategic Planning and Corporate Governance. 
The Board collectively have reasonable knowledge and 
understanding of local, regional and global economic market forces as well as legal and regulatory environment in which the Company operates.
Ghanaian nationals, ordinarily resident in Ghana, constitute 
at least 30% of the Board composition of the Company. Independent Directors constitute at least 30% of the composition of the Board.
The Company does not have members serving on its Board that 
are Related Persons.Board size and structureAs at 31 December 2022, the Board members are 12 including the Chairperson, the majority of whom were non-executive and ordinarily resident in Ghana. There is an appropriate balance of power and authority on the Board between the executive and non-executive directors and no individual or group dominates the Board’s decision-making process.
Directors’ appointments and Managing Director tenure
The procedure for appointment of directors to the Board is formal and transparent and conforms to the Directive issued by the Bank of Ghana on fit and proper persons.  The Bank complies with the Bank of Ghana in respect of the tenure of the Managing Director of 12 years.
Appointment of key management personnel
The Bank ensures that nominations are submitted to the Bank of Ghana before it appoints a Key Management Personnel. With an enhanced due diligence Report on proposed nominees as Key Management Personnel. The Bank also conducts police criminal background checks; obtains references from previous employers and 2 other reputable persons; notifies the Central Bank about the recruitment of Key Management personnel and obtains approval.
Alternate Director
The Bank does not currently have any alternate directors.
Board Chairperson
The Chair of the Board is an Independent Non-Executive Director and is ordinarily resident in Ghana. The Chair provides leadership to the Board and ensures that Board decisions are taken on a sound and well-informed basis. The Chair encourages and promotes critical discussion and ensures that dissenting views can be expressed and discussed within the decision-making process.  The Chairperson encourages constructive relationship within the Board and between the Board and Management. The Chair  promotes checks and balances in the governance structure of the Bank. She generally does not serve as a Chairman on any of the Board sub-committees.  The Bank of Ghana approved the appointment of the Board Chair on 15 September 2020.
The Board Secretary
The Board Secretary serves as an interface between the Board and Management and supports  the Chairperson  in ensuring the smooth functioning of the Board. The Board Secretary advises the Board on matters relating to statutory duties of the directors under the law, disclosure obligations, and company law regulations as well as on matters of corporate governance requirements and effective Board processes.  The Board Secretary ensures that directors are provided with complete, adequate and timely information prior to Board meetings.
27
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Board meetings
The Company holds a minimum of four Board meetings annually in February, April, July and December.  It also has one Annual General Meeting. In compliance with the Bank of Ghana’s Directive on Corporate Governance, the Board hereby discloses the total number of Board meetings and the attendance rate of each Director below which is above 50% if any:-
NO NAME 24 FEB  202225 APR 202216 JUN 202228 JUL  2022 29 SEPT 202224 OCT 20229 DEC 2022ATTENDANCE
1 Margaret Boateng Sekyere                                                       yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 100%
2 Hakim Ouzzani  yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 100%
3 Georges Wega                                              yes yes no no yes no yes 57.1%
4 Agnes Tauty Giraldi yes yes no yes yes yes yes 85.7%
5  Arnaud De Gaudemaris                              yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 100%
6 Laurette Otchere                                                              yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 100%
7 Francis  Awua-Kyerematen yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 100%
8 Fosuhene Acheampong yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 100%
9 Juliana Asante yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 100%
10 Yvon Puyou yes yes no no yes yes yes 71.4%
11 Peggy Dzodzomenyo n/a n/a n/a yes yes yes yes 100%
12 Arthur Bright n/a n/a n/a yes yes yes yes 100%
n/a  - Applicable to Directors  who were undergoing various stages of approval during the year
The Board discusses the business affairs of the Bank through reports submitted by management in writing as follows:-
y a summary of financial statements and performance 
reviews against the approved budget, business plan, peers and industry;
 y the extent to which the bank is exposed to various risks such as credit, liquidity, interest rate, foreign exchange, operational and other risks;
 y review of non-performing loans, related party transactions and credit concentration;
 y activities of the Bank in the financial market and in its “nostro” accounts;
 y effectiveness of internal control systems and human resource issues;
 y outstanding litigations and contingent liabilities;
 y compliance with Anti-Money Laundering/ Counter Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) policies, laws and regulations;
 y list of related party exposures and their classification.Board sub-committeesThe Board has in place a Risk Committee, an Audit and Accounts Committee, a Nomination and Compensation Committee, a Cyber and Information Security Committee and an Independent Directors Committee. The Chief Risk Officer, the Chief Compliance Officer and the Head of Internal Audit report directly to the Board via the Board sub committees and the Managing Director.
Internal control organization
Internal Control Organization in Societe Generale Ghana PLC deals with the three lines of defence to control risks arising from the Banks Activities, Societe Generale Ghana Internal Control Instruction and SG Code Book A of the Societe Generale Group Code.  a) The First Line of Defence - all staff, business lines, support functions, Central Departments and the Permanent Control Team. In charge of day-to-day risk management, it must know its risks, identify control needs and ensure that the necessary controls are implemented. Must have appropriate processes and controls in place to ensure that risks are identified, analysed, measured, monitored and managed within the Group’s risk appetite and that business activities comply with external and internal requirements. Implements Level 1 permanent controls 
28
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
in line with the norms, standards and procedures defined by 
the relevant second line of defence functions. 
b) The Second Line of Defence - Compliance, Risk and Finance.  
They ensure all risks are identified, assessed, analysed, measured, monitored, managed and properly reported by the business lines.   Performs second level controls to verify the adequacy performance and effectiveness of the first level permanent controls.  Defines norms, standards and procedures related to the operational risk management system and provides key indicators and analysis for overall risk monitoring. Challenges and supports the implementation of risk management measures by the business lines to ensure that the processes and controls put in place by the first line of defence are well designed and effective. Performs second-level controls to verify the adequacy, performance and effectiveness of first-level permanent control.  
c) The Third Line of Defence is Internal Audit. Evaluates the 
Group’s risk management, control and corporate governance processes using a systematic and methodical approach.  Evaluates the quality of risk management within the audited perimeter and the relevance and effectiveness of the permanent control system. Strictly independent of the business lines and Permanent Control and also in charge of the independent review of the first two lines of defence. 
Review of risk management system 
Societe Generale Ghana has in place, an effective Risk Management Policy and generally complies with Bank of Ghana’s regulations in respect of Risk Management.  The Bank’s Risk Management Framework was implemented in line with the SG Group policies as well as Bank of Ghana’s Directives. Global risks coverage was adequate within the Bank. 
Annual Declaration on Risk Management
The Bank of Ghana pursuant to Section 92(1) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking Institution Act 2016 Act 930 issued a Risk Management Directive 2021.  Section 40 of the Risk Management Directive provides that the Board of a Regulated Financial Institution shall make an annual declaration on risk Management of the Regulated Financial Institution to Bank of Ghana and in its Audited Financial Statement and/or on its website stating that to the best of its knowing and having made appropriate enquiries in all material respects.  The Risk Management declaration of the Regulated Financial Institution shall declare if there has been any breach of or material deviation from the Risk Management Framework or the requirements as detailed in the declaration below:-
Declaration by the Board of Directors of Societe Generale 
Ghana PLCa. Societe Generale Ghana PLC has put in place systems for ensuring compliance with all the prudential requirements.b. The systems and resources that are in place for identifying, measuring, evaluating, controlling, mitigating and reporting material risks and the Risk Management Framework its self is appropriate to Societe Generale Ghana  and is commensurate with the size, business mix and complexity of Societe Generale Ghana PLC.
c. The Risk Management and Internal Control systems in place are operating effectively and are adequate.
d. Societe Generale Ghana PLC has a Risk Management Strategy that complies with the Bank of Ghana Risk Management Directive dated November 2021 and Societe Generale Ghana PLC has generally complied with the requirements described in the Risk Management Strategy. 
 e. Societe Generale Ghana PLC is satisfied with the effectiveness of its processes and Management Information Systems
Societe Generale Ghana PLC to the best of its knowledge  and having made the appropriate enquiries in all material aspects:-
The Risk committee
Analyses on a periodical basis the organisation and functioning of the Bank’s risks departments. The Committee reviews the portfolio of credit and market risks to which the Bank is exposed. As regards counterparty risks, the Risk Committee shall  review the content of and changes to the portfolio per type of facility and debtor; the regulatory ratios and key indicators (consumption of own funds by major risks, risk worsening ratios, concentration risk per sector, cost of the risk, etc.), changes to the quality of commitments: sensitive, irregular, non-performing files,  compliance with the conditional authorizations issued by the Societe Generale; adequacy of the level of provision for the risks incurred, the efficiency of debt collection and reports to the Board of Directors on its work. 
Membership of the risk committee
The members of the Board Risk Committee shall comprise all categories of Directors and shall exclude the Chairman of the Board and at least 1 Independent Non-executive Director, 4 Non-Executive Directors and 1 Executive Director. The Chairperson and members of the Sub Committee shall be appointed by the Board and shall serve for an initial term of 3 years which may be extended by not more than 2 additional years.  The Committee members and the Chairperson shall serve until they are replaced, resign or their successors are duly nominated and elected by the Board. 
The Board Risk Committee shall meet at least quarterly. 
Three (3) members of the Board Risk Committee shall constitute 
a quorum for the transaction of its business. A quorum shall be reached with the attendance of the members either in person or by telephone or video conference. 
29
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
The Chairperson of the Board Risk Committee shall be an 
Independent Non-Executive Director who is knowledgeable in risk management, finance, accounting and economics.  The members of the Board Risk Committee shall comprise all categories of directors and shall exclude the Chairperson of the Board. In his/her absence, the remaining members present shall elect one of themselves to chair the meeting. 
The following officers of the Bank shall attend all meetings of the 
Board Risk Committee – Chief Risk Officer ; Chief Finance Officer; Chief Internal Auditor ;  Head of Credit or Corporate Banking ; Head of Business Promotion; Company Secretary. Members of the Board who are not members of the Sub-Committee may, at the request of the Chairman attend meetings. However, such Non-Committee members shall have no voting rights. The Committee may request members of management or other officers of the Bank to attend all or any part of any meeting or to provide relevant information in written form. 
The Chairperson shall, in coordination with the Secretary to 
the Committee, be responsible for scheduling all meetings and providing a written agenda for each meeting.  Members of the Committee shall each be entitled to one (1) vote and a majority of votes shall decide a matter and in the event of a tie, the Chairperson shall have a casting vote. The Committee shall report to the full Board regularly following each meeting and make such recommendations to the Board, as it deems appropriate. 
2022 report from the risk committee 
Current Membership 
 y Mrs Juliana Asante     - Chair  
 y Mr Georges Wega   - Member
 y Mr Hakim Ouzzani  -Member
 y Mrs Agnes Tauty Giraldi  -Member
 y Mr Arnaud De Gaudemaris -Member
Meetings 2022
Four meetings were held in the year 2022 on 15 February 2022, 
13 April 2022, 13 July 2022 and 23 November 2022.  
Mrs. Juliana Asante is an Independent Non-Executive Director 
and Chairperson of the Risk Committee. The Risk Committee has the following functions: It analyses on a periodical basis the organisation and functioning of the Bank’s risks departments; and reviews the portfolio of credit and market risks to which the Bank is exposed. As regards counterparty risks, the Risk Committee shall review the following, the content of and changes to the portfolio per type of facility and debtor; the regulatory ratios and key indicators,  changes to the quality of commitments: sensitive, irregular, non-performing files,  compliance with the conditional authorizations issued by the Societe Generale; adequacy of the level of provision for the risks incurred, the efficiency of debt collection and reports to the Board of Directors on its work. The Committee reports its findings to the Board of Directors with the requisite recommendations. In attendance at Risk Committee meetings are the Deputy Managing Director, Chief Operating Officer, Chief Risk Officer, Head of Audit Department, Chief Finance Officer, General Manager Corporate Coverage, Chief Compliance Officer and the Head of Permanent Control.  The Risk Committee operates under a Charter. 
Summary of Issues Discussed
 y economic environment; 
 y risk indicators; 
 y the banks position on the market in comparison with peer 
banks; 
 y the global portfolio review ; 
 y market activities;  
 y irregular commitments monitoring; 
 y corporate credit exposure; 
 y retail credit exposure; 
 y operational risk and managerial supervision;
 y risk appetite statement key Indicators.
Recommendations made to the Board for approval
 y valuation framework policy
 y market risk policy
 y risk appetite framework
 y  risk appetite statement
The Board of Directors of the Bank hereby declare that to the best of its knowledge and having made the appropriate enquiries in all material respect that:-
a) Societe Generale Ghana PLC has put in place systems for 
ensuring compliance with all prudential requirements;
b) the systems and resources that are in place for identifying, 
measuring, evaluating, controlling, mitigating and reporting material risks and the Risk Management Framework itself are appropriate to the Bank and is commensurate with the size, business mix and complexity of the Bank
c) the risk management framework and internal control 
systems in place are operating effectively and are adequate
d) the Bank has a Risk Management System that complies with 
the Bank of Ghana Risk Management Directive and the Bank has complied with the requirements described in its Risks Management Strategy and 
e) the Bank is satisfied with the effectiveness of its processes 
and management information systems.
30
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
The Audit and Accounts Committee
The Audit and Accounts Committee of the Board is responsible 
for overseeing the financial reporting process including the establishment of accounting policies and practices; providing oversight of internal and external audit functions, the appointment, compensation and removal of auditors, reviewing and approving the audit scope and frequency, receiving key audit reports and ensuring that Senior Management is taking the necessary corrective actions in a timely manner to address control weaknesses, non-compliance with policies, laws and regulations and other problems identified by auditors as well as any other relevant matters referred to the committee by the Board and; monitoring the Internal Control system in the Bank.   
The purpose of the Audit and Accounts Committee (whose 
authority is derived from the Board) is to assist the Board in fulfilling its oversight responsibilities.  This includes: 
 y keeps up-to-date with changes in the legal and regulatory environment affecting the work the committee monitors for proper execution. 
 y reviews and validates the accounts of the bank and the work of the External Auditors. 
 y recommends for approval of the Board of Directors the Audited Financial Statements and quarterly unaudited financial statements,
 y periodically gives an opinion of the organization and functioning of the Bank’s periodic and permanent internal control (including Risks related to Non Compliance). 
 y suggests to the Board of Directors the relevant adaptations, monitors the implementation of these measures and reports on their application to the Board of Directors. 
 y validates, in consultation with the Group’s relevant Departments, the Audit Plan of the Bank while making sure that the developmental method enables the areas of risk to be properly detected and covered.
 y follows up the implementation of the Audit Plan and proposes adjustments if necessary.  
 y reviews the work done by Periodic and Permanent Control and reports to the Board of Directors on any anomalies and gives its opinion of the relevance of the corrective measures chosen by the Bank’s Management; monitors the implementation, according to the deadlines set, of the critical periodic control recommendations as well as the solving of the critical points identified; Informs the Board of Directors of any discrepancies in the critical and priority corrective measures (failures exposing the entity to a high risk). 
 y reviews the procedures and the functioning of the anti-money laundering and terrorism financing systems, and the compliance risk control.  y submits to the Board of Directors the measures likely to improve, where applicable, the security of operations, and monitors the implementation of the selected measures.
 y is generally informed by Management of any event occurring in the operation of the Bank which is likely to adversely affect its control of risks. 
The list of issues to be addressed at the Audit and Accounts Committee meetings are formalized in the Audit and Accounts Committee File; Audit and Accounts Committee Appendix; Permanent Control activity; Internal Audit Report to the Audit and Accounts Committee  and discussed according to the Agenda.
Membership of the audit and accounts committee
The Sub-Committee shall consist solely of Non-Executive 
directors. Their composition shall not be less than 4 members who must be competent in accounting, auditing and finance.  The Chairperson and members of the Sub-Committee shall be appointed by the Board and shall serve for an initial term of 3 years which may be extended by not more than 2 additional years.  The Committee members and the Chairperson shall serve until they are replaced, resign or their successors are duly nominated and elected by the Board. The Sub-Committee shall meet at least three times each year and as often as may be deemed necessary or appropriate. 
Two (2) members of the Sub-Committee shall constitute a 
quorum for the transaction of its business. A quorum shall be reached with the attendance of the members either in person or by telephone or video conference.  The Chair of the Sub-Committee shall be Independent and appointed by the Board and shall preside when present. In his/her absence, the remaining members present shall nominate another Non-Executive member to chair the meeting.
The following officers of the Bank shall attend all meetings of the 
Sub-Committee: Managing Director; Deputy Managing Director; Chief Operating Officer; Chief Compliance Officer; Chief Finance Officer; Head of Internal Audit; Head of Permanent Control; Company Secretary. 
Members of the Board who are not members of the Sub-
Committee may, at the request of the Chairperson attend meetings. However, such Non-Committee members shall have no voting rights.  The Sub-Committee may request members of management or other officers of the Bank to attend all or any part of any meeting or to provide relevant information in written form.  
The Chairperson shall, in coordination with the Secretary to 
the Sub-Committee, be responsible for scheduling all meetings and providing a written agenda for each meeting. Members of the Sub-Committee shall each be entitled to one (1) vote and a majority of votes shall decide a matter and in the event of a tie, the Chairperson shall have a casting vote. 
31
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
The Sub-Committee shall report to the full Board regularly 
following each meeting and make such recommendations to 
the Board, as it deems appropriate.  The Committee has an oversight role, and in fulfilling that role, may rely on reviews and reports provided by management and the Committee’s advisors. In performing its oversight responsibilities, the Committee may, as and to the extent that it determines appropriate, review with management and the Board, and actively advise them regarding, the following matters: 
 y issues relating to the preparation and control of accounting and financial information, 
 y the independence of the statutory auditors, 
 y the effectiveness of the Internal Control,
 y measurement, supervision and control systems for risk related to accounting and financial processes;  
 y recommendations to the Board;
 y the effectiveness of the internal control and measurement systems and;
 y the supervision of internal control risks. 
2022  Report from the audit and accounts committee
Current membership
 y Mr Francis Awua-Kyerematen  - Chair
 y Mrs Juliana Asante    -  Member
 y Mr Arnaud De Gaudemaris  - Member
 y Mrs Laurette Otchere    - Member
 y Mr Fosuhene Acheampong  - Member
Meetings in 2022Three meetings were held in the year 2022 on 18 February 2022, 
21 April 2022, 19 July 2022 and 20 October 2022. 
Mr. Francis Awua-Kyerematen is an Independent Non-Executive 
Director and Chairperson of the Audit and Accounts Committee.  This Committee reviews and makes recommendations to the Board on all aspects of the audit and financial reporting processes. In attendance at Audit and Accounts Committee meetings are the Managing Director, Deputy Managing Director, Chief Operating Officer, Chief Finance Officer, Head of Audit Department, Head of Permanent Control Department and where necessary, the Bank’s External Auditors.  
Summary of issues discussed
 y presentation of the Internal Control System in Societe 
Generale Ghana;  y validation of Audited Financial Statements
 y validation of quaterly Unaudited Financial Statements
 y operational Risk and Level 1 Permanent Control Executive Summary; 
 y level 2 Permanent Control Risk Finance and Compliance; 
 y periodic Control Activity; 
 y compliance & Anti-Money Laundering & Combatting Financing of Terrorism; 
 y finance and taxation; 
 y level 2 Control Finance; 
 y summary of Statutory Auditors
Summary of issues analysed
1.  Unaudited Financial Statements
2.  The overall Risk Assessment of the Permanent Control 
System covering the Framework of the control system; Monitoring of Key Risk Management Processes; Supervision of Level 1 Controls; Supervision of Level 2 Controls; Steering of Recommendations. 
3.  Permanent Control Activities & Risk Supervision comprising Operational Risk; Compliance Risk & Financial Security, Monitoring; Anti-Money Laundering; Major Legal Risks; Market Risks, Structural Risks,  Managerial Supervision Activity, IT Risk Management, Security of Staff & Equipment, New Products & Essential Outsourced Services, Twenty Largest Depositors, Follow Up of Accounts & Quality, and Business Continuity Planning and Crisis Management; Compliance, Anti Money Laundering  & Combatting Financing of Terrorism.
4.  Audit Plan Execution and Main Conclusions from Audit Missions. 
5.  Follow up of Audit Recommendations.
6.  Level 2 Permanent Control Plan Implementation and Missions undertaken for Risk and Compliance and Finance and Taxation.
7.  The Internal Control System at the Bank; Overall Assessment of the Permanent Control System at the Bank; Operational Risks; Managerial Supervision; Business Continuity; Know Your Customer; IT Risks; Legal Risks; Level 2 Permanent Control; Finance and Taxation; the Establishment of the Financial Information and Accounts Review; Taxation Regulatory Reporting; Missions on the Summary of Statutory Auditors; The Periodic Control System; the 2022 Audit Plan and realization rate and Special Missions.  
32
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
8.  Action Plans were analysed on the global overview of 
Compliance Risks, Financial Security and Regulatory Compliance concerning Governance, Animations, Trainings and the Normative Framework; Monitoring & Control, KYC and AML; Embargoes and Sanctions; Clients Protection and Business Ethics.  
Commitee recommendations for Board approval 
 y 2022 Quarterly Unaudited Financial Statements; 
 y Permanent Control Reports 
 y Periodic Control Reports; 
 y Abandonment of one Audit Mission; 
 y Level 2 Permanent Control Reports; 
 y The appointment of Deloitte and Touche as External 
Auditors   
 y Policy on Personal Transactions of Individuals Exposed to Clients of Investment Services.
 y Anti-Money Laundering & Combatting Financing of Terrorism Policy
 y Societe Generale Ghana 2023 Audit Plan;
 y Societe Generale Ghana 2023 Level 2 Control Plan;
 y Societe Generale Ghana 2023 Permanent Control Training Plan
 y Societe Generale Ghana 2023 Compliance Training Plan;
 y Societe Generale Ghana 2023 Compliance Program; 
 y Operational Risk Master Procedure for Societe Generale Ghana
 y Summary of Remediation works on Business Continuity Plan for Outsourced Services
The Nomination and compensation committee
The Nomination and Compensation Committee is a committee of the Board of Directors. The following are the elements that may come under its scope and authority.  The Bank’s general wage policy; the detailed salaries of  the Bank’s senior executives and key management personnel changes in social liabilities; administrators and company managers pay. The purpose of the committee is to :- 
 y ensure compliance with Bank of Ghana’s Corporate Governance Directive 2018;  
 y ensure compliance with Bank of Ghana’s Fit and Proper Persons Directive July 2019;   y ensure compliance with Societe Generale Group Corporate Governance Principles Applicable to Group Entities Instruction No 014122.
 y assist the Board to accomplish its aim of ensuring that the Bank has a Board of competent and effective composition, size and commitment to discharge its responsibilities and duties in the best interest of the Bank and its shareholders.
 
 y to achieve best corporate practices by advising the Board in respect of succession plans, appointments and compensation packages for Management Officers of the Bank.
The Nomination and Compensation Committee does not however, have authority to make decisions on these issues and has a purely advisory capacity; therefore it may only formulate opinions and recommendations to the Board of Directors.
Membership of the committee 
The Committee shall be composed of not less than four (4) members of the Board who are suitably skilled and possess the relevant skills as required by the Sub- Committee.  The Chairperson and members of the Sub -Committee shall be appointed by the Board and shall serve for an initial term of 3 years which may be extended by not more than 2 additional years.  The Committee members and the Chairperson shall serve until they are replaced, resign or their successors are duly nominated and elected by the Board. 
 y the Committee shall identify and recommend to the Board, nominees for membership.   
 y the Committee shall ensure the nominees have the qualities of Integrity, Honesty and Accountability; Objectivity and Knowledge in Business and Financial matters and other relevant qualities and experience.  
 y the Committee shall regularly assess the Directors represented on the Board.
 y the Committee shall effect Board Performance and Appraisal covering all aspects of the Board structure and composition, responsibilities, processes and relationships as well as individual member’s competencies and their respective roles in the Board’s performance.   
 y the Committee shall be consulted on issues relating to succession plans; appointments and compensation of Senior Management Officers of the Bank based on the recommendations of Management regarding in particular the following:- 
- succession plans: manager dashboard, departmental succession planning, key business issues and people implication; people and organization and commitment,  
33
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
- the appointment of key management personnel, 
 - compensation for senior management officers, packages needed to attract, retain, and motivate qualified and competent management staff.
 The Committee shall consider and adopt its own agenda. The Committee will meet at least twice a year. The quorum for a meeting is three (3) Committee members.  A Committee meeting shall be deemed to have taken place if any technological means allows any of its members to participate in discussions even if not all of them are physically present in the same place.  A member who is not physically present but participating by technological means is taken to be present. 
Minutes of the Committee, taken by the Company Secretary as 
and when adopted, shall be kept as official records.  Minutes of each Committee meeting must be included in the papers prepared for the next full Board meeting.   Minutes shall be distributed to all Committee Members after the Committee has adopted it and the Chairman has duly countersigned it. Minutes, agenda and supporting documentation are available to Directors upon request to the Company Secretary.  
The Committee Chair shall submit a report to the Board of 
Directors after each Committee meeting. The Committee may seek any information it considers necessary to fulfill its objectives and shall have access to Management by way of explanations, information, views and comments. The Nomination and Compensation Committee shall review its Charter when it considers necessary with the approval of the Board of Directors which shall be granted by a resolution. 
2022  Report from the nomination and compensation committee 
Current membership
 y Mrs Laurette Otchere - Chair
 y Mr Georges Wega   -  Member
 y Mr Hakim Ouzzani   - Member
 y Mr Arthur Bright   - Member
Meetings in 2022
Five meetings were held in the year 2022 on 16 February 2022, 
20 April 2022; 16 June 2022, 12 July 2022 and 24 November 2022.
Summary of issues discussedDuring the period under review, the Committee discussed 
and analysed the Ghana National Banking College Corporate Governance Training for the Board of Directors and the fees to be incurred by the Bank; Nominations to the Board, Nominations of Key Management Personnel; Organisation Chart; Proposal in respect of Directors Fees and Allowances; the vacant positions at the Human Resources Department;  The Committee also reviewed the Compliance Opinion of Mrs. Peggy Osei Tutu Dzodzomenyo  a proposed nominee for the position of an Independent Non-Executive Director; Mr Arthur Bright a proposed nominee for the position of a Non-Executive Director, the Compliance Opinion of Mr. Kwame Abbey, a nominee for the position of Deputy Managing Director in charge of Support Functions and the proposal for an external evaluation of the Board of Societe Generale Ghana.  
Recommendations made to the Board for approval  
 y Quarterly Corporate Organization Chart
 y External Board Appraisal by PWC
 y 2022 Board Self-Appraisal for all the Board of Directors
 y Nomination of Mrs. Peggy Osei Tutu Dzodzomenyo as an 
Independent Non-Executive Director
 y Appointment of Mrs. Peggy Osei Tutu Dzodzomenyo as Chair of the Independent Directors Committee
 y Nomination of Mr. Arthur Bright as a Non-Executive Director
 y Nomination of Mr. Kwame Abbey as the Deputy Managing Director in charge of Support Functions
 y Nomination of Mrs. Mildred Caesar as Head, Human Resource Management
The Cyber and information security committee
The Cyber and Information Security Committee is responsible for Security risk management strategy; and approving the Bank’s policies on cyber and information security, outsourcing, survivability, backup and recovery from cyber incidents and attacks, and disaster events.  The purpose of the Cyber and Information Security Sub-Committee of the Board is to assist the Board in fulfilling its oversight responsibilities of the Cyber and Information assets of the Bank. This includes: 
 y ensuring that adequate systems are in place to protect the Bank’s information and data assets, IT infrastructure, intellectual property as well as other third party confidential information in the possession of the Bank. 
 y ensuring that effective internal controls and risk management practices are implemented to achieve security, reliability, availability, resiliency, and recoverability. 
 y responding to and managing any Cyber and Information Security threats and breaches.
34
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Membership of the Committee
The Committee shall be composed of not less than three (3) 
members of the Board who are suitably skilled and possess the relevant skill as required by the Sub-Committee. The Chairperson and members of the Sub-Committee shall be appointed by the Board and shall serve for an initial term of 3 years which may be extended by not more than 2 additional years.  The Committee members and the Chairperson shall serve until they are replaced, resign or their successors are duly nominated and elected by the Board. 
The Sub-Committee shall meet at least twice each year and 
as often as may be deemed necessary or appropriate. Two (2) members of the Sub-Committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of its business. A quorum shall be reached with the attendance of the members either in person or by telephone or video conference. 
The Chairperson of the Sub-Committee shall be appointed by 
the Board and shall preside at all meetings. In his/her absence, the remaining members present shall nominate another Non-Executive member to chair the meeting. 
The following officers of the Bank shall attend all meetings 
of the Sub-Committee- Chief Operating Officer; Information Officer; Chief and Information Security Officer. Members of the Board who are not members of the Sub-Committee may, at the request of the Chairperson attend meetings. However, such Non-Committee members shall have no voting rights. The Sub-Committee may request members of management or other officers of the Bank to attend all or any part of any meeting or to provide relevant information in written form. The Chief Operating Officer has the role as Director of Cyber and Information Security (DCIS). 
The Chairperson shall, in coordination with the Secretary to 
the Sub-Committee, be responsible for scheduling all meetings and providing a written agenda for each meeting.  Members of the Sub-Committee shall each be entitled to one (1) vote, a majority of votes shall decide a matter, and in the event of a tie, the Chairperson shall have a casting vote. The Sub-Committee shall report to the full Board regularly following each meeting and make such recommendations to the Board as it deems appropriate.  
The Committee has an oversight role, and in fulfilling that role, 
may rely on reviews and reports provided by management and the Committee’s advisors. In performing its oversight responsibilities, the Committee may, as and to the extent that it determines appropriate, review with management and the Board, and actively advise them regarding, the following matters:
 y the implementation of information technology requirements of the Societe Generale Group and the requirements of the Bank of Ghana Cyber and Information Security Directive 2018;  y the effectiveness of the Bank’s Cyber and Information Security programs and its practices for identifying, assessing and mitigating cyber and information security risks across all business functions; 
 y the Bank’s controls to prevent, detect and respond to cyber-attacks or information or data breaches involving SG Ghana electronic information, intellectual property and data; 
 y management’s implementation of cybersecurity programs and risk policies and procedures and management’s actions to safeguard their effectiveness and the integrity of SG Ghana’s information technology  systems and facilities;
 y cyber crisis preparedness, incident response plans, and disaster recovery capabilities; 
 y reviewing reports and presentations received from management and the Committee’s advisors, including as appropriate the DCIS, CISO and other employees of the Bank ,external auditors, internal auditors, legal advisors  and other external experts regarding the management of cyber and information security programs and risks; and 
 y other matters as the Committee Chair or other members of the Committee determine relevant to the Committee’s oversight of cybersecurity programs and risk assessment and management. 
2022  Report from the cyber and information security committee Current Membership
 y Mr. Yvon Puyou   -   Chairman
 y Mr Francis Awua-Kyerematen - Member
 y Mr. Fosuhene Acheampong  -  Member
 y Mr. Hakim Ouzzani  - Member
Meetings in 2022Three meetings were held in the year 2022 on 13 April 2022, 19 July 2022, and 20 October 2022.
Summary of issues discussed
The implementation of the Bank of Ghana Cyber and Information Security Directive 2018.  These are categorized into 3 parts:
 y the ISO/IEC 27001 Certification  which establishes the Information Security Management System such as the policies, procedures, processes and technologies used to manage information security risks in the Bank 
 y the PCI-DSS Certification which ensures that Payment Card Data of Customers are managed in compliance with the internationally accepted Payment Card Data Security Standard
35
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
 y other Information Security requirement not covered by 
the ISO 27001 or PCI-DSS Standards such as in the areas of Electronic Banking, Recruitment and Termination of Staff, Contracts with Vendors and Suppliers, Physical Security, Applications and Software, Communication Networks
The Bank has the following certifications ISO27001 certification and  ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Certification and PCI-DSS Certification.
Recommendations made to the Board of directors for approval 
 y Cyber and Information Security Report to be submitted to 
the Bank of Ghana 
 y Electronic Banking Policy
 y Sensitive Positions Policy
Committee of Independent Directors
The purpose of the Committee of Independent Directors shall 
be to determine the remuneration of Executive Directors. 
Membership of the Committee 
The Committee shall be composed of not less than two (2) 
members of the Board who are Independent Directors.   The Chairperson and members of the Sub Committee shall be appointed by the Board and shall serve for an initial term of 3 years which may be extended by not more than 2 additional years.  The Committee members and the Chairperson shall serve until they are replaced, resign or their successors are duly nominated and elected by the Board. 
The Committee shall determine the emoluments of Executive 
Directors. The Committee shall consider and adopt its own agenda. The Committee shall meet at least once a year. The quorum for a Committee meeting is two(2) Committee members. A Committee meeting shall be deemed to have taken place if any technological means allows any of its members to participate in discussions even if not all of them are physically present in the same place.  A member who is not physically present but participating by technological means is taken to be present. 
Minutes of the Committee, taken by the Company Secretary as 
and when adopted, shall be kept as official records. Minutes of each Committee meeting must be included in the papers prepared for the next full Board meeting. Minutes shall be distributed to all Committee Members after the Committee has adopted it and the Chairman has duly countersigned it.  Minutes, agenda and supporting documentation are available to Directors upon request to the Company Secretary.  
The Committee Chair shall submit a report to the Board of 
Directors after each Committee meeting. The Committee may seek any information it considers necessary to fulfill its objectives and shall have access to Management by way of explanations, information, views and comments.  
2022 Report from the independent directors committee
Current membership
 y Mrs Peggy Osei Tutu Dzodzomenyo  - Chair
 y Mr Francis Awua-Kyerematen           -  Member
 y Mrs Juliana Asante                             - Member
Meetings in 2022Two meetings were held in the year 2022 on 6 January 2022 and 
23 November 2022.
Summary of issues discussed
The Terms of Reference were discussed.  This covered the 
Purpose; Membership, Scope; Agenda; Quorum; Minutes; Reporting to the Board and Access to Information and Independent Advice.  The Committee had convened pursuant to  Section 72(d) of the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive 2018 which provided that a committee of independent directors shall determine the remuneration of executive directors.  The Emoluments of the Executive Director was discussed.
Recommendations made to the Board of directors for approval 
A recommendation was made to the Board for the approval of 
the emoluments of the Executive Director.
Other engagements of directors
The Board are aware that to enable greater commitment to 
Board matters, no director holds more than five (5) directorship positions at a time in both financial and non-financial companies (including off-shore engagements) subject to the restriction against concurrent directorships in banks under section 58(1)(e) of Act 930. Directors’ other engagements are disclosed below: 
36
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Types and duties of outside board and management positions.
Name Nationality Age Position Appointed Profession  & Directorships 
Margaret  Boateng 
SekyereGhanaian 60 Independent 2019  y Accountant
Hakim Ouzzani French 54 Executive 2016  y Banker
 y SSB Investments Ltd
Laurette Korkor OtchereGhanaian 60 Non-Executive 2017  y Deputy Director General SSNIT
 y Total Oil Co. Ltd
 y Barrister at Law
 y Human Resource Expert 
Agnes Tauty Giraldi French 57 Non-Executive 2018  y Banker
 y SG Managing Director; Europe, Africa, Structured Trade         Receivables Finance
Arnaud De GaudemarisFrench 46 Non-Executive 2019  y Banker
 y Director SG Benin
FrancisAwua-KyerematenGhanaian 54 Independent Non-Executive2021  y Chartered Accountant
 y Managing Director, Winchmore Capital Ltd
 y Cenit Energy Limited
 y Council for Technical & Voca-tional Education and Training
Georges Wega Cameroonian 53 Non-Executive 2019  y Banker
 y Director SG Benin
Fosuhene AcheampongGhanaian 59 Non-Executive 2020  y Chartered Accountant
 y Director Cedar Seal Company
Juliana Asante Ghanaian 56 Independent Non-Executive2021  y Chartered Accountant
 y Director Integritas Limited
 y World Athletics
Yvon Puyou French 57 Non-Executive 2022  y Banker
 y Chief Information Officer at Societe Generale  African Mediterranean & Overseas
Peggy Dzodzomenyo Ghanaian 64 Independent  Non-Executive2022  y Member of Board of Trustees Matthew 25 Palliative Care Centre
 y Council Member of Cardinal Turkson Foundation for Education and Health.
 y Board Member of Martin de Pores Basic School, Dansoman.
Arthur Bright  Cameroonian 35 Non-Executive 2022  y  Banker
 y Chief of Staff SG African Mediterranean& Overseas 
37
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Board performance evaluation
The Board carries out self-assessment of its performance for 
individual Board members in order to review the effectiveness of its own governance practices and procedures The Board also assesses Anti-Money Laundering and Combatting Financing of Terrorism Training issues to determine where improvements may be needed and make any necessary changes.  The Board undertakes a formal and rigorous evaluation of its performance with external facilitation of the process every two (2) years.
Report on board evaluationAn in-house performance evaluation of the Board is conducted 
annually and a copy of the results submitted to the Bank of Ghana not later than 30 June of each year, separate in-house performance evaluation of the Board on AML/CFT issues shall be submitted to the Bank of Ghana and the Financial Intelligence Centre for June and December each year before the end of the quarter following the evaluation period.
A statement on the external evaluation of the Board is included 
in the annual report of the Bank.  A detailed copy of the report was submitted to the Bank of Ghana.  This will be undertaken once every two years.
Statement on the external board evaluation
The Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive was issued under the powers conferred by Sections 56 and Section 92(1) of Banks & Specialised Deposit Taking Institutions Act 2016 Act 930 and applies to Banks Savings and Loans Companies Finance Houses and Financial Holding Companies licence or registered under Act 930
Sections 46 and 47 of the Corporate Governance Directive 2018 
stipulates that the Board must undertake a formal and rigorous evaluation of its performance with external facilitation of the process every two years.
Ernst and Young Advisory services conducted the external 
board evaluation  for the year 2020.PriceWaterHouseCoopers Ghana Limited (“PWC”) of PWC Tower, A4 Rangoon Lane Cantonments City, PMB CT42 Cantonments Accra conducted  an external Board evaluation  for the years 2021 and 2022. The areas covered by the PWC External Board evaluation were an assessment of Societe Generale Ghana PLCs current Board practices in line with:-
1. Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive
2. Securities & Exchange Commission  Corporate Governance 
Code for Listed Companies 2020
3. The Companies Act 2019 Act 922
4. The Bank of Ghana Cyber & Information Security Directive
5. The Bank of Ghana Fit and Proper Persons Directive 2019
6. Corporate Governance Leading PracticesIndividual Directors Assessment Report for the year ended 
31 December 2022The Directors review and appraisal was undertaken which covered the Boards performance, the sub committees and individual Board members.  This was to review the effectiveness of Societe Generale’s own governance practices and procedures.  This review is critical to improving the standard of corporate governance and the overall performance of the Board.The Board of Directors of Societe Generale Ghana had an overall Board Performance average score 93.37% covering overall performance; continuous learning, time commitment and peer assessment.  The analysis highlighted the overall score of 93.97% per the assessment of each members expertise based on the following criteria:-
1. Directors Assessment of Board members performance
2. Commitment to continuous Learning & Development
3. Time Commitment of Board members to the Business of 
the Bank.
 y Based on the Directors Training attendance reviewed, the members of the Board obtained an average score of 9.52 out of 10 which translates to  95.2% of the training attendance by Board members. 
 y The Directors time commitment to the Business of The Bank was assessed based on their attendance to Board meetings, Committee meetings and the Annual General meeting in 2022.  Directors obtained an average score of 8.66 out of 10 representing 86.6% attendance. 
 y Based on Peer Rating of the Board of Directors, Directors received an average score of 75.19 out of 80 representing 93.9% on the  criteria of Leadership, Knowledge & Understanding; Relationship, Communication and Meeting Participation.
Independent Corporate Governance & Board Evaluation Report 2021 -2022The PWCs Independent Corporate Governance & Board Evaluation included analysis of  relevant documentation such as the Board Charter, committee minutes, files of Board members, discussions with the Chairman of the Board, the Managing Director, the Deputy Managing Director and Key Management Personnel. 
PWC’s overall assessment was that the Board and Management 
generally complied with the  benchmark criteria used for the analysis during the period under review ie Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive 2018; The Corporate Governance Code for Listed Companies 2020 Securities & Exchange Commission Directive; The Companies Act 2019 Act 922; The Bank of Ghana Cyber & Information Security Directive; The Bank of Ghana Fit and Proper Persons Directive 2019 and Corporate Governance Leading Practices.The PWC Corporate Governance Evaluation review covered 
38
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Board Charter and Terms of Reference; Societe Generale 
Ghana’s Policies and Strategies; Company incorporation documents; Curriculum Vitae of Board members; Leadership; Board Committees structure, composition, membership and Committee charters; Board dynamics processes effectiveness and performance; strategy and business monitoring; Oversight of financial performance, risk management and compliance; Transparency and accountability.
The scope of the Board Evaluation Review covered The 
Board’s Mandate/Term of Reference; Succession Plan and appointment to the Board; Board Structure and composition; Board dynamics; Board knowledge and experience; Board responsibilities; Board and Committee Charters; Board Responsibilities; Board Processes; Board relationship with stakeholders; Responsibilities and reporting lines; meetings and administration; Board Secretariat; Board performance evaluation and remuneration; Board focus; oversight of executive performance and induction and training.
Questionnaires were designed by PWC and administered to 
each Board member to obtain each Directors view on the Banks corporate governance practice.  All 12 Board members completed their questionnaires.In general, the Directors assessed the practices of the Board as fully satisfactory. The Board scored above average in the overall evaluation with a score of 4.26 out of an expected mean of 5.  The score was arrived at calculating the average score of the total sum of all the 27 questions answered. PWC’s Independent Corporate Governance & Board Evaluation Report 2021-2022 has been  presented to the Board of Directors on 27th April 2023.  Thereafter, the Report was submitted to the Bank of Ghana. 
A Board of Directors work shop would be held in 2023 to 
analyse the Recommendations and an Acton Plan would be put in place to comply with the recommendations.  The report indicated that out of 26 Key Findings from a review in 12 areas, there were 23 opportunities for improvement and 3 possible noncompliance areas.
Conflicts of Interest
The Board has in place a conflict of interest policy which includes ; 
 y the duty of the director to avoid possible activities that 
could create conflicts of interest;
 y a review or approval process for directors to follow before they engage in certain activity so as to ensure that such activity will not create a conflict of interest;
 y the duty of the director to disclose any matter that may result, or has already resulted in a conflict of interest;
 y the responsibility of the director to abstain from voting as prescribed  and on any matter where the director may have conflict of interest; y adequate procedures for transactions with related parties to be made on a non-preferential basis; and the way in which the Board will deal with any non-compliance with the policy.
The Conflict of Interest Policy was approved by the Board 
of Directors. The Board maintains an up-to-date register for documenting and managing conflict of interest situations in the Company.
Group structures
The Board of SG Financial Services Holding Company shall have the ultimate responsibility for the adequate corporate governance across the Group. The Board shall ensure that there are governance policies and mechanisms appropriate to the structure, business and risk of the group and its entities.  The Board of Directors in addition to the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive of December 2018 utilizes the SG Group Corporate Governance Principles Instruction 01422 VI EN applicable to Group entities as at 2018 and the Societe Generale Code Book A on Governance and Organisational Principles which was published for all entities under the Group in May 2020.
Senior management duties
Under the direction of the Board, Senior Management ensures: 
 y that the activities of the Banking Institution are consistent 
with the business strategy, risk tolerance/appetite and policies approved by the Board
 y that it establishes a management structure that promotes accountability and transparency
 y the implementation of  appropriate systems for managing risks both financial and non-financial  to which the Bank is exposed.
 y that they engage skilled and competent staff and provide training and development opportunities to sustain the delivery of short and long-term business objectives, the risk management framework and protect the reputation of the Bank.
Risk Management and Internal Controls
The Board ensures that the Bank has effective internal controls systems and a risk management function including a Chief Risk Officer with sufficient authority, stature, independence, resources and access to the Board.
Risk management function
The Board has in place a risk management function responsible for:
 y identifying key risks to the Bank, 
 y assessing those risks and the Bank’s exposure to the 
identified risks; 
 y monitoring the risk exposures and determining the corresponding capital needs on an on¬going basis;
39
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC y monitoring and assessing decisions to accept particular 
risks, risk mitigation measures and if the  risk decisions are in line with the Board approved risk tolerance/appetite and risk policy; 
 y submitting risk management reports to Senior Management and the Board.
Chief risk officer
The Company has a Chief Risk Officer who is an independent Key Management Personnel and who has no involvement in the operations of the bank with distinct responsibility for the risk management function and the comprehensive risk management framework of the bank across the entire organization. The independence of the Chief Risk Officer is distinct from other executive functions and business line responsibilities. The Chief Risk Officer reports to the Board via the Risk Committee with a functional report line to the Managing Director.  He has unfettered reporting access to Board and its Risk committee. Interaction between the Board Risk Committee and the Chief Risk Officer is regular and comprehensively documented.
Internal controls
Internal controls within the Bank are designed to ensure that each key risk has a policy, process or other measure, as well as a control to ensure that such policy, process or other measure is being applied and works as intended. Internal controls help provide comfort that financial and management information is reliable, timely and complete and that the Bank is in compliance with its various obligations, including applicable laws and regulations.
Head internal audit
The Bank has a Head, Internal Audit who is an independent Key Management Personnel who has no involvement in the audited activities and business line responsibilities of the Bank.  The Head Internal Audit is competent to examine all areas in which the Bank operates and:
 y has the professional competence to collect and analyze financial information as well as evaluate audit evidence and to communicate with the stakeholders of the internal audit function; possess sufficient knowledge of auditing techniques and methodologies;
 y is a member of a relevant recognized professional body;
The Head of Internal Audit reports to the Board Sub-Committee on audit and has direct access to the Board and its audit committee. Interaction between the Board Audit Committee and the Internal Audit is regular and comprehensively documented.
Group-wide and Bank-wide Risk Management
Risks in the Bank are identified and monitored on an on-going group-wide and bank-wide basis, and the sophistication of the risk management and internal control infrastructure - including, in particular, a sufficiently robust information technology infrastructure keeps pace with developments.Risk management in Subsidiary BanksThe Board and Senior Management of parent banks or financial holding companies conducts strategic, group-wide risk management and prescribe group risk policies. The Board and Senior Management of the Bank have appropriate input into the group-wide risk management policies and assessments of local risks. Adequate stress-testing of the subsidiary portfolios is done based on both the economic and operating environment of the subsidiary and on potential stress of the parent bank or Financial Holding Company. The results of stress tests and other risk management reports shall be communicated to the Board and Senior Management.
Internal and External Audit Functions
The Board and Senior Management effectively utilize the work conducted by the internal audit functions, external auditors and internal control functions. The Board recognizes and acknowledges that independent, competent and qualified internal and external auditors, as well as other internal control functions, are vital to the corporate governance process and engage the auditors to judge the effectiveness of the risk management function and the compliance function.
Compensation System 
Where share options are adopted as part of executive remuneration or compensation, it shall be tied to performance and subject to shareholders’ approval at an annual general meeting.  The Bank has disclosed in details, the number of shares held by the top 20 Shareholders. 
The Bank’s Corporate Structure
The Board and Senior Management understand the structure and the organization of the group and the Bank. The Board actively oversees the design and operation of the compensation system. The Board monitors and reviews the compensation system to ensure that it is effectively aligned to ensure
 y prudent risk taking; 
 y levels of remuneration are sufficient to attract, retain and motivate executive officers of the bank and this is 
balanced against the interest of the bank in not paying 
excessive remuneration;
 y where remuneration is tied to performance, it shall be designed in such a way as to prevent excessive risk taking;
Executive directors are not entitled to sitting allowances and directors’ fees;  Non-Executive directors’ remuneration be limited to directors’ fees, sitting allowances for Board and Committee meetings and are not performance related.
Disclosure and Transparency
The bank has submitted a list of its significant shareholders, directors and Key Management personnel as at 31 of December  to the Bank of Ghana by 15 January of the following year. Below 
is the Corporate Structure of the Bank.
Report of the Directors cont’d
40
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNomination & Compensation 
Committee
Board of Directors
Managing Director
Hakim OUZZANICyber and Information 
Security Committee
Audit & Accounts
Committee
Audit
Frank LAWOEChief Compliance Officer
Abena ASARE-MENAKO Independent Directors 
Committee
Executive Committee
Assets and Liabilities Committee Risk Committee
Chief Risk Officer
Pierre GLEMOTExecutive Assistant
Theodora Nelly BAGBONON
Company Secretary
Angela N. BONSUAdviser to MD
(Vacant)
Human Resource Management
Mildred CAESARFinance
Felix ADJAKU
Deputy Managing Director 
Commercial
Francois POUSSE
Chief Operating Officer
Bernice ALLOTEY
Purchashing 
Samuel AKOTO
Permanent Control
Lavana TAMATEYDeputy Managing Director 
Support
Kwame ABBEY
Organisation and Projects
Adwoa Asieduaa NTIRAKWAChief Information Security Officer
Francis Amanor TEYE
Cards Business
Michael Okpoti CHARWAY
Logistics
Lawrence RIBEIRO
Security
Baba Mubarak AHMADUPayments
Kwame OFORI-OFFEIInformation Systems Technology
Abigail ALLOTEY
Central Back Office
Connor GWIRACorporate Coverage
Daniel SARPONGTreasury
Catherine JOHNSON
Structured Finance
Kwame ANTERKYI
KYC
Celestine AMISON-ADDYRetail Business
Obed HOYAH
Marketing, Multi Channel & Quality 
Elikplim MUZZUSHAREHOLDERSCORPORATE STRUCTURE
41
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Ethics and professionalism
The Bank has in place, a Code of Conduct which was duly approved by the Board of Directors.  The Code of Conduct has been made available to the Board of Directors and all Employees. The Code shall be reviewed regularly and when necessary. It contains practices necessary to maintain confidence in the integrity of the Bank and commit the Bank, its staff, management and the Board to the highest standards of professional behaviour, business conduct and sustainable banking practices.  It has been approved by the Board and signed off by employees that they understand the code and sanctions for breaching the policy.    
Cooling-off period
The Bank will respect the Cooling Off period under the Bank of Ghana Corporate Governance Directive  2018 which stipulates that former Bank of Ghana officers, directors or senior executives shall not be eligible for appointment as a director of the Bank until after a period of two (2) years following the expiration or termination of their contract of employment or service from the Bank of Ghana.  A practicing audit professional or partner who is rendering services or had rendered auditing services in the banking industry shall not be appointed as a director of the bank until one (1) year has elapsed since last engagement with any Bank by that person.
A code of ethics for all company employees
Societe Generale Ghana has a Code of Ethics for staff and this has been made available to all employees of the Bank.
Code of ethics for the Board and waivers to the ethics code
The Constitution of the Bank provides for ethics for the Board and provides that the Directors stand in a fiduciary relationship towards the Company in any transaction with it or on its behalf.  A Director shall act all times in what he or she believes to be the best interests of the Company as a whole so as to preserve its assets, further its business, and promote the purposes for which it was formed, and in such manner as a faithful, diligent, careful and ordinarily skilful Director would act in the circumstances. In considering whether a particular transaction or course of action is in the best interests of the Company as a whole, a Director may have regard to the interests of the employees, as well as the members, of the Company, and, when appointed by, or as representative of, a special class of members, employees, or creditors may give special, but not exclusive, consideration to the interests of that class
Performance evaluation process
The Board has in place an evaluation process which covers the functions of the Board; Board meetings Management and procedures; Appointment, Induction, Training and Development; Succession and Removal; Board Structure; Information and Communication. An evaluation was undertaken during the Reporting Period.  Role and functions of the Board of Directors and committees of the BoardThe main task of the Board of Directors is to make sure that the Bank’s operations comply with the relevant applicable regulations and with the strategy defined.  In this capacity, it must:
 y define and follow up the implementation of the Bank’s strategic orientations while making sure its business is developing in the proper conditions of security; 
 y check and approve management by relying on the work of the reporting committees from which it regularly receives information and to which it may assign tasks where necessary 
 y appoint, according to applicable local rules, the Bank’s Representatives who shall manage the Bank,
 y make sure the information given to the banking and market authorities and to shareholders is reliable. Therefore, it draws up the financial statements then presents them to the shareholders’ meeting for approval.
 y it must assess the way it operates annually. 
There are five reporting Committees responsible for supporting the Board of Directors, which are the Risk Committee; the Audit and Accounts Committee; and the Nomination and Compensation Committee; the Cyber and Information Security Committee and Independent Directors Committee.
Independence of the Board of Directors
The Bank is committed to achieving the highest standards of corporate governance, corporate responsibility and risk management when conducting its business. The Bank ensures that it conducts its business activities in accordance with all laws and regulations, which govern its business activities. The Board of Directors are responsible for ensuring that Societe Generale Ghana achieves and maintains a high standard of corporate governance and practices.
The Bank has a twelve-member  Board comprising one executive 
director; four Independent directors and seven non-executive directors. The Board consists of highly qualified individuals with diverse professional experiences:   The core role of the Board is to promote the success of the Bank by providing direction and supervision in the Bank’s affairs. Among other roles, the Board: 
 y provides leadership to the Bank within a framework of prudent and effective controls which enable risks to be assessed and managed;
 y provides input into the development of the long-term objectives and overall commercial strategy for the Bank 
42
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
and is responsible for the oversight of the Bank’s operations 
while evaluating and directing the implementation of the Bank’s controls and procedures;
 y provides oversight of the Bank’s strategic aims, ensuring that the necessary financial and human resources are in place for the Bank to meet its objectives, as well as reviewing management performance;
 y upholds the Bank’s values and standards and ensures that its obligations to its shareholders and other stakeholders are understood and met; and
 y ensures timely and accurate financial reporting to shareholders.
Remuneration and other benefits of DirectorsSection 185(1) of the Companies Act ,2019 (Act 992) provides that the fees and other remuneration including remuneration payable to the directors in whatsoever capacity shall be determined from time to time by ordinary resolution of the company and not by any provisions in an agreement. The constitution of the Company provides that remuneration payable to Directors shall not be increased except pursuant to an ordinary resolution passed at a General Meeting, where notice of the proposed increase has been given in the Notice convening the meeting.  Collectively, the Directors at the Board meeting preceding the Annual General Meeting agree their fees and this is then placed before the Shareholders of the Bank through an ordinary resolution at the Annual General Meeting.  
Checks and balances mechanisms- Balancing the power of 
the CEO with the power of the Board.The Constitution of the Company provides that the Board of Directors may from time to time appoint one of their body to the office of Managing Director. The person shall be the Chief Executive, for such period and on such terms as may be determined and, subject to the terms of any agreement entered into in any particular case, may revoke such appointment and such appointment shall be automatically determined if the holder of the office ceases from any cause to be a Director.
Subject to any directives of the Board on matters of general 
policy, the Managing Director shall be responsible for the directions of the day-to-day business of the Bank and for its administration. 
If the Managing Director is absent from Ghana or is otherwise 
incapacitated from performing duties of the office, the Board may authorise an employee of the Bank to exercise, for the time being, all the duties and powers of the Managing Director.
The Directors may entrust to and confer upon a Managing 
Director any of the powers exercisable by them upon such terms and with such restrictions as they think fit. Either collaterally with, or to the exclusion of, their own powers and subject to the terms of any agreement entered into in any particular case, may from time to time revoke or vary all or any of such powers.
Process for appointment of external auditors
Section 81 of the Banks and Specialized Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) vests the shareholders of a bank with the power to appoint the external auditors at an Annual General Meeting and be approved by the Bank of Ghana in the manner and on the terms as may be described.  
Process for interaction with external auditors
The Board of Directors on an annual basis invite the external auditors of the company to a meeting for an Independent Auditors Report on the Audited Financial Statements of the Company. The external auditors of the company explain to the Board the completion of the audit on the company which is undertaken in accordance with international standards.  They usually state that the audit is conducted to enable the external auditors form an opinion on the financial statements that have been prepared by management with oversight of the Board of Directors.  They further explain to the Board that the audit of the financial statements does not relieve management or the Board of their responsibilities.  The auditors draw the Board’s attention to any matters identified during the audit of the financial statements of the company.  The auditors obtain management’s responses to any matter(s) and draw the Board’s attention to any areas of concern. At the meeting the External Auditors Report on the Financial Statements, the Directors Responsibility for the Financial Statements, the Auditors Responsibility, Opinion and Report on other legal and regulatory requirements.    External Auditors of the BankPursuant to Section 139 of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and Section 44 of the Constitution of the Company, shareholders of the Bank appointed Deloitte & Touche as Auditors of the Company on 29 September 2022. Thus, they are in their first year of providing auditing services to the bank.  The Bank also received the approval of the Ghana Securities & Exchange Commission and the Bank of Ghana to appoint Deloitte & Touche as external auditors for Societe Generale Ghana PLC. 
Messrs Ernst & Young was appointed as Auditors of Societe 
Generale Ghana PLC on 31 March 2017.  Pursuant to Section 139 (11) of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992). Their tenure  came to an end at the close of the 42nd Annual General Meeting held on 29 September 2022. 
In accordance with Section 139 (5) of the Companies Act, 2019 
(Act 992), the auditors, Messrs. Deloitte & Touche will continue in office as auditors of the bank.
43
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCReport of the Directors cont’d
Board Chair 
(Margaret Boateng  Sekyere) ACCRA  
27  April 2023   Francis Awua-Kyerematen                                  (Audit And Accounts Committee Chairman) ACCRA  
27  April 2023    By order of the BoardAuditors’ involvement in non-audit work and the fees paid to the auditorsApart from the audit assignment, Deloitte and Touche Chartered Accountants, were not engaged by the bank to undertake any non-audit work during the year. 
Auditors Remuneration
The Auditors remuneration is determined in accordance with  Section 140 of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992). 
Stated Capital of the Bank
The stated capital of the Bank is GHS 404,245,427.
Substantial shareholders
Details of the Bank’s twenty largest shareholders are disclosed in the notes to the financial statements.
Corporate Governance
Societe Generale Ghana PLC respects the standards of 
good corporate governance, which include transparency, accountability and rights of all its stakeholders. 
Compliance with securities and exchange commission 
regulationsThe Bank has complied with the regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (L.I. 1728 Regulation 61) and has submitted to the Commission as requested, two (2) reports of the Audit and Accounts Committee for the year 2022. The Audit Committee held three meetings during the year under review.  In fulfilment of the Securities and Exchange Commission requirements, we present a summary of the reports so submitted:  
 y Report on Periodic Control, Permanent Control; Compliance; Credit Risk, Operational Risk, and Market Risk Activities
 y Report on Structural Risks and Statutory Ratios
 y Report on Bank of Ghana’s Prudential Ratios
 y Report on an overview of the Audit Department and its functions
 y Report on Compliance Monitoring, Anti Money Laundering and Permanent Supervision ensuring continuous monitoring of operational activities.
 y Report on Counterparty Risks
 y Report on Changes in Organisational Structure
 y Report on Business Continuity Plan
 y Audit Reports on Branches submitted. 
 y Report on Managing Conflict of Interest within the Bank
The External Auditors submitted their audit plan for the year and concluded that the audit approach will be risk based and control focused and that the audit will be in accordance with International Standards on Auditing.
Approval of the report of the directors and the financial statements The report of the directors and the financial statements were approved by the board of directors on 27 April 2023
44
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCINDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT
TO THE SHAREHOLDERS OF SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC
Report on the audit of the financial statements 
OpinionWe have audited the accompanying financial statements of 
Societe Generale Ghana Plc, set out on pages 53 to 114, which comprise the statement of financial position as at 31 December 2022, the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income, statement of changes in equity and statement of cash flows for the year then ended, the notes to the financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory disclosures.
In our opinion, the financial statements give a true and fair 
view of the financial position of Societe Generale Ghana Plc as at 31 December 2022, and its financial performance and cash flows for the year then ended in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards, the requirements of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).
Basis for opinionWe conducted our audit in accordance with International 
Standards on Auditing (ISAs). Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of our report. We are independent of the Bank in accordance with the requirements of the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants’ (IESBA), International Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants (including International Independence Standards) (IESBA code) and other independence requirements applicable to performing audits of financial statements in Ghana. We have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with the IESBA Code and other ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of financial statements in Ghana.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is 
sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Key audit matters
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional 
judgement, were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period. These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole, and in forming our opinion thereon, and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
45
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC
   Key audit matter  How the matter was addressed in the audit
Impairment allowance on loans and advances
As at 31 December 2022, the Bank’s gross loan and 
advances portfolio was GH¢ 3,635.01 million (2021: GH¢ 2,804.86 million) with an associated expected credit losses (“ECL” or “loss allowance”) of GH¢ 433.73 million (2021: GH¢ 234.15 million).
As described in notes 2.17, 20d, 20e and 20f to the financial 
statements, ECL represents a complex accounting estimate and involves management’s evaluation of probable loan losses expected to be incurred over the life of the loan.
ECL was considered to be a key audit matter due to the 
level of significant judgement applied by management in its determination and the increased uncertainty related to the impact of local economic challenges. The determination of related loss allowance is judgmental in nature.
We have identified a risk that loans and advances 
that have met the Bank’s policy on default criteria and therefore should move to Stage 2(12- month credit losses staging bucket) or Stage 3 (lifetime expected credit losses staging bucket) have not been appropriately identified and thus the ECL determined may have been misstated.We performed the following procedures with the assistance of our credit specialists:
 y Updated our understanding of management’s processes around the measurement of the ECL including management’s modelling methodology and incorporation of assumptions
 y Evaluated the design and tested the implementation of relevant controls relating to the determination of changes in credit risk i.e., significant increases in credit risk and default criteria
 y Reviewed the appropriateness of management judgements/assumptions used in the determination of the appropriateness of staging of loans.
 y Assessed conformity of management’s ECL policy with Central bank’s regulatory directives (including current guidance) and IFRS.
 y Evaluate the ongoing impact of the current macro-economic conditions on changes in credit risk 
 y Engaged loan officers and others (legal) to evaluate the completeness of the assessment of whether facilities that have significant increases in credit risk/default risk have been appropriately identified and staged
 y Evaluated whether the staging used in the final ECL model appropriately reflects the determined staging buckets and all relevant considerations
 y Evaluated management’s calculation of the ECL for arithmetical accuracy
 y Based on an audit sample, agreed the input data (for example days past due) to underlying audit evidence including loan systems data and loan documentation
 y Evaluated the disclosures made with respect to staging of ECL are appropriate within the context of the Bank and current circumstances  
Based on the procedures described above, we found management’s estimate to be reasonable.Independent Auditor’s Report cont’d
46
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC
   Key audit matter  How the matter was addressed in the audit
Impairment of Government of Ghana (GoG) Debt instruments
On 5 December 2022, the Government of Ghana launched 
the Domestic Debt Exchange Programme (“Debt Exchange”) for a voluntarily exchange of holdings of domestic notes and bonds, including E.S.L.A. and Daakye bonds (“Old Bonds”) but excluding Treasury Bills, for a package of New Bonds to be issued by the GoG.  
As at 31 December 2022, the Bank’s investment in GoG 
debt instruments was GHS 909.31 million (2021: GH¢ 1,471.91 million) with an associated expected credit losses (“ECL” or “loss allowance”) of GH¢ 68.78 million (2021: GH¢ 0.71 million). 
The accounting policies, critical estimates and 
judgements related to GoG Debt instruments are described in notes 2.17, 21a to the financial statements.
The determination of an appropriate discount rate for the 
purpose of fair valuing the new bonds was considered a key audit matter as it is not a simple process especially as these new bonds are yet to be issued and there is no market data, with the need for supportable information on the key assumptions made by management in its determination of the discount rate.
It is likely that the determination of discount rates may 
be based on assumptions by management that may be biased or may not be based on best or supportable factors and therefore not be appropriate.We performed the following procedures on the assessment of impairment of GoG Debt instruments with the assistance of our credit specialists:
 y Updated our understanding of management’s processes around the measurement of the ECL including management’s modelling methodology and incorporation of assumptions.
 y Evaluated the design and tested the implementation of relevant controls relating to the government bonds. 
 y Reviewed the appropriateness of management judgements/assumptions used in the determination of the discount rates.
 y Reviewed the staging of different instruments to confirm alignment with the Central bank’s directives on DDEP .
 y Independently determined the cashflows from the new bonds and determined their present values using the discount rate.
 y Compared the results of the discounted cash flows with the carrying value of bonds.
 y Recognized the difference between the discounted cash flows and the carrying value of bonds as impairment loss 
Based on the procedures described above, we found management’s assessment of the impairment of GoG Debt instruments to be reasonable.Independent Auditor’s Report cont’d
47
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC
Independent Auditor’s Report cont’d
Other matter 
The financial statements of Societe Generale Ghana Plc for the 
year ended 31 December 2021 were audited by another auditor who expressed an unmodified opinion on those financial statements on 25 February 2022.
Other information
The directors are responsible for the other information. 
The other information comprises the Our Purpose and Values in the Service of our Clients, Notice and Agenda for Annual General Meeting, Corporate Information, Profile of the Board of Directors, Key Management Personnel, Board Chair’s Statement, Managing Director’s Review, Report of the Directors, Financial Highlights, the Value-Added Statement, Twenty Largest Shareholders and Annual General Meeting Guidelines, Proxy Form, Resolutions and Branch Network, which we obtained prior to the date of this report. The other information does not include the financial statements and our auditor’s report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the 
other information and we do not and will not express an audit opinion or any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements, our 
responsibility is to read the other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If, based on the work we have performed on the other 
information obtained prior to the date of this auditor’s report, we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in this regard.
Responsibilities of the Directors for the financial statements
The directors are responsible for the preparation and fair 
presentation of the financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards, the requirements of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised Deposit Taking-Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements, the directors are 
responsible for assessing the Banks’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Bank or to cease operations, or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the financial 
statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about 
whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of this financial statements.
As part of an audit in accordance with ISAs, we exercise 
professional judgement and maintain professional scepticism throughout the audit.
We also:• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement 
of the financial statements, whether due to fraud or error, 
design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.
• Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant 
to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are 
appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Bank’s internal control.
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies 
used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and 
related disclosures made by the directors.
• Conclude on the appropriateness of the directors’ 
use of the going concern basis of accounting and based on 
the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern. If we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are required to draw attention in our auditor’s report to the related 
48
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC
Independent Auditor’s Report cont’d
disclosures in the financial statements or, if such disclosures 
are inadequate, to modify our opinion. Our conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of our auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Bank to cease to continue as a going concern.
• Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and 
content of the financial statements, including the disclosures, 
and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.
• Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence 
regarding the financial information of the entities or business 
activities within the Bank to express an opinion on the financial statements. We are responsible for the direction, supervision and performance of the group audit. We remain solely responsible for our audit opinion.
We communicate with those charged with governance 
regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that we identify during our audit.
We also provide those charged with governance with a statement 
that we have complied with relevant ethical requirements regarding independence, and to communicate with them all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on our independence, and where applicable, actions taken to eliminate threats or safeguards applied.
From the matters communicated with those charged with 
governance, we determine those matters that were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current year and are therefore the key audit matters. We describe these matters in our auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, in extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a matter should not be communicated in our report because the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication.
Report on other legal and regulatory requirements
In accordance with the Seventh Schedule of the Companies Act, 
2019 (Act 992) we expressly state that:
1. We have obtained the information and explanations, 
which to the best of our knowledge and belief were necessary 
for the purpose of the audit.
2. In our opinion:
• proper books of accounts have been kept by the 
Bank, so far as appears from our examination of those books.
• the information and explanations given to us, were in 
the manner required by the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and 
give a true and fair view of the:
a. statement of financial position of the Bank at the end 
of the financial year, andb. statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive 
income for the financial year.
3. The Bank’s statement of financial position and statement of 
profit or loss and other comprehensive income are in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
4.  We are independent of the Bank, pursuant to Section 143 of 
the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992).
The Banks and Specialized Deposit-Taking Institution Act, 2016 
(Act 930) requires that we state certain matters in our report. We hereby state that:
1.  We confirm that the accounts give a true and fair view of the 
state of the affairs of the Bank and the results of operations for the year under review.
2. We were able to obtain all the information and 
explanation required for the efficient performance of our duties 
49
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC
Independent Auditor’s Report cont’d
as auditors.
3. We confirm that the transactions of the Bank were within its powers.
4. In our opinion, the Bank has generally complied with the provisions of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2020 (Act 1044), 
the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2008 (Act 762) and Regulations made under these enactments.5. The Bank has generally complied with the provisions of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 
(Act 930).
The engagement partner on the audit resulting in this independent auditor’s report is Emmanuel Martey (ICAG/P/1476).
For and on behalf of Deloitte & Touche (ICAG/F/2023/129)
Chartered AccountantsThe Deloitte PlacePlot No.71Off George Walker Bush HighwayNorth DzorwuluAccra – Ghana28 April 2023
50
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC
Independent Auditor’s Report cont’d
51
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS 
65%
9%26%
Net Interest Income Commission and fees Other I ncome47%
13%30%10%
Loans Investments Cas h a nd s hort te rm funds Other A ssets
2,790 3,431 4,444 5,115 5,437 6,596 
 -  1,000  2,000  3,000  4,000  5,000  6,000  7,000201720182019202020212022Total Assets GH¢M 
1,410 1,665 2,643 2,563 2,504 3,103 
 -  500  1,000  1,500  2,000  2,500  3,000  3,500201720182019202020212022Net Loans GH¢M 
308 767 141 604 1,614 854 
 -  200  400  600  800  1,000  1,200  1,400  1,600  1,800201720182019202020212022Investments GH¢M 
1,994 2,165 3,195 3,485 3,393 4,241 
 -  500  1,000  1,500  2,000  2,500  3,000  3,500  4,000  4,500201720182019202020212022Deposits GH¢M 
519 702 802 926 1,029 1,089 
 -  200  400  600  800  1,000  1,200201720182019202020212022Shareholders Funds GH ¢M 
386 402 509 549636802 
 -  100  200  300  400  500  600  700  800  900201720182019202020212022Net Banking income GH ¢M 
91 62 129 154 184 109 
 -  50  100  150  200201720182019202020212022Profit After Tax GH¢M 64%17%10%9%
D ep os its Shareholders Funds Borrowings Other LiabilitiesTotal Assets Breakdown
Total liabilities Breakdown
Net Banking Income BreakdownNet Loans GH ¢M
Shareholders Funds GH ¢MTotal Assets GH¢M
Investments GH¢M
Deposits GH ¢M
Net Banking Income GH¢M Profit After Tax GH¢M
52
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC53
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC
THE 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS      Note   2022 2021
          GH¢   GH¢ 
Interest income    5     659,497,229   510,992,929 
Interest expense    6     (134,930,676)  (109,990,417)
Net interest income        524,566,553    401,002,512 
Fees & commission income                                                        7    105,172,123   77,475,216 
Fees & commission expense    8    (36,313,952)  (27,252,208)
Net fees and commission income        68,858,171   50,223,008 
Net trading revenue                                                                    9    95,734,001   40,793,352 
Net income from other financial instruments carried at fair value 10    64,104,688   52,835,645 
Other operating income                                                               11    48,318,570   91,439,536 
Total other operating income        208,157,259   185,068,533 
Operating income        801,581,983    636,294,053 
Net impairment loss on financial assets    12    (284,737,040)  (33,407,581)
Operating income net of impairment charges         516,844,943    602,886,472 
Personnel expense    13    (171,621,011)  (135,516,867)
Depreciation and amortization    22a    (39,433,935)  (34,807,599)
Other operating expenses                                                           14    (137,405,680)  (150,595,307)
Profit before income tax          168,384,317    281,966,699 
Income tax expense                                                                   15    (59,544,391)  (97,637,066)
Profit after tax expense         108,839,926    184,329,633 
Other comprehensive income         
Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss      
Debt instruments at fair value through other comprehensive income- 40h    (507,879)  (689,424)
Deferred tax credit    15a    126,970   172,356 
Other comprehensive income, net of income tax                                 (380,909)  (517,069)
Total comprehensive income for the year        108,459,017    183,812,564 
Earnings per share:        
Basic earnings per share (GH¢)     16    0.153    0.260 
Diluted earnings per share (Gh¢)     16    0.153   0.260  
 STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS AND 
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2022   
54
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCSTATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION 
AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2022 
      Note   2022 2021
          GH¢  GH¢  
 Assets        
 Cash and cash equivalents    17   1,950,873,066 963,960,922
 Non-pledged trading assets    18    14,157,407  143,156,280
   Derivative financial assets    26   188,780,000 -
 Debt instruments  at fair value through other comprehensive income 21      43,784,934     87,240,744
 Debt instruments  at  amortised  cost     21   796,556,383 1,383,955,004
 Loans and advances to customers    20        3,102,993,067 2,504,366,677
 Equity Investments    19                     3,549,552                       2,923,386
 Deferred tax assets    15a    89,859,093       27,010,706 
  Property, plant and equipment    22               292,785,473  255,268,418
 Intangible assets    23      10,499,595  15,009,794
  Other assets    25               101,997,533  54,130,188
  Total assets              6,595,836,103        5,437,022,119  
 Liabilities         
 Derivative financial liabilities    26    -       40,509,648  
   Deposits from banks    28   1,145,398 1,916,501
 Deposits from customers    28    4,239,568,200  3,391,140,683 
 Borrowings    27   642,585,961 588,864,628 
  Current tax liabilities    24         57,267,488        21,325,184  
 Other liabilities    29        566,631,231      364,700,138  
 Total liabilities             5,507,198,278         4,408,456,782  
 Shareholders’ fund         
 Stated capital     30       404,245,427     404,245,427
 Retained earnings     40c        240,555,598         207,312,183
 Revaluation reserve    40d        123,670,260         123,670,260
 Statutory reserve     40e         319,728,614          292,518,632
 Other reserves     40h      437,926       818,835
 Total shareholders’ fund              1,088,637,825         1,028,565,337
 Total liabilities and shareholders’ fund              6,595,836,103         5,437,022,119
 
The accompanying notes form an integral part of these financial statements.
Approved by the Board  and signed on its behalf as follows:
     
Margaret Boateng Sekyere                       Francis Awua-Kyerematen
  (Board Chair)       (Audit & Accounts Committee Chairman)
   27 April 2023      27 April 2023
55
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCStated  
capital
GH¢
Stated  
capital
GH¢Retained
earnings
GH¢
Retained
earnings
GH¢Revaluation 
reserve
GH¢
Revaluation 
reserve
GH¢Statutory 
reserve
GH¢
Statutory 
reserve
GH¢Other 
reserves
GH¢
Other 
reserves
GH¢Total 
shareholders’ 
equity
GH¢
Total 
shareholders’ 
equity
GH¢STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2022
      
For the the year ended 31 December 2022      
Balance as at 1 January 2022   404,245,427   207,312,183   123,670,260   292,518,632   818,835   1,028,565,337   
Movements during the year :                                                 
Profit for the year   -     108,839,926   -     -     -     108,839,926  
Other movements in equity: Debt Instruments at FVOCI  -     -     -     -     (380,909)  (380,909)
Dividend  -     (48,386,529)  -      -     (48,386,529) 
Transfer to statutory reserve  -     (27,209,982)  -     27,209,982   -     -   
Balance as at 31 December 2022   404,245,427   240,555,598   123,670,260   319,728,614   437,926   1,088,637,825   
For the year ended 31 December 2021      Balance as at 1 January 2021   404,245,427   149,907,074   123,670,260   246,436,224   1,335,904   925,594,889     
Movements during the year :                                                 
Profit for the year  -     184,329,633   -     -     -     184,329,633   
Other movements in equity: Debt Instruments at FVOCI  -     -     -     -     (517,069)  (517,069)
Dividend  -     (80,842,116)  -      -     (80,842,116) 
Transfer to statutory reserve  -     (46,082,408)  -     46,082,408   -     -    
Balance as at 31 December 2021   404,245,427   207,312,183   123,670,260   292,518,632   818,835   1,028,565,337   
56
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCSTATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS  
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2022
   
   2022 2021
  Note GH¢   GH¢  
 
 Operating activities
 Operating profit before taxation       168,384,317        281,966,699  
 Adjustments for:
 Impairment provision   285,979,329   42,426,979 
   Fair value adjustment on equity investment   (626,166)  27,729  
 Fair value adjustment on non pledged trading assets      352,927     (498,926) 
 Depreciation and amortization   39,433,935   34,807,599  
  Other non cash adjustments  -         253,313  
  Derivative revaluation   (229,289,648)  40,509,648 
 Unrealized loss on forex revaluation   60,711,093   1,320,467 
 Operating profit before working capital changes          324,945,787   400,813,508        
 Changes in operating and other assets and liabilities
 Change in non-pledged trading assets      128,645,946   (74,760,878) 
 Change in loans and advances to customers     (799,755,478)  27,865,665  
 Change in other assets          (50,665,064)   7,878,602 
 Change in deposit from banks 28  (771,103)  (2,029,437) 
 Change in deposit from customers       848,427,517   (90,202,638) 
 Change in other liabilities        194,731,051   54,684,492   
   320,612,869   (76,564,195)    
 Income tax paid   (86,323,504)  (113,593,324)
  Net cash flows generated from  operating activities     559,235,152   210,655,989  
   Cash flow from investing activities Purchase of  investment securities    (794,670,777)  (1,032,517,701)
 Matured investment securities   1,356,764,169   97,146,284   
 Purchase of property, plant and equipment 22b   (35,324,571)  (9,976,896)
 Purchase of intangible assets 23  (37,116,220)  (3,096,344)
 Net cash generated from/ (used in)  investing activities     489,652,601    (948,444,658) 
 Cash flow from financing activities
 Proceeds from borrowings        53,869,563     235,912,636    
 Repayment of borrowings    (5,718,075)  (13,314,795)
 Dividend paid 31   (48,386,529)  (80,842,116)
 Net cash flows generated from financing activities    (235,041)      141,755,726  
 Change in cash and cash equivalents    1,048,652,712   (596,032,944) 
 Net foreign exchange and revaluation difference    (60,711,093)  (1,320,467)
 Cash & cash equivalents at 1  January    964,630,209   1,561,983,616  
 Cash and cash equivalents  at 31 December  17  1,952,571,828    964,630,206     
 Operational cash flows from interest:
 Interest received    589,588,536   442,305,271     
 Interest paid    128,714,797   111,201,903    
57
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC1. Reporting entity 
Societe Generale Ghana PLC (the Bank) is a limited 
liability company incorporated in Ghana under the Companies Act, 2019  (Act 992). The Bank is domiciled in Ghana with its registered office at 2nd Crescent, Royalt Castle Road, Ring Road Central, Accra. The Bank is authorized and licensed to carry out the  business of banking and provides retail banking, corporate banking, investment banking and other financial intermediation activities and specialized financing activities such as leasing and consumer credits through its network of branches and outlets including divisions across Ghana.
The principal activities of the Bank are described in 
the Directors’ Report. Societe Generale (Group), a bank incorporated in France, is the ultimate parent of the Bank.
The Bank is listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange (GSE).  
This has enabled the equity shares of the Bank to be traded publicly on the GSE.
1.1 Authorization for publicationThe financial statements of the Bank for the year ended 31 December 2022 were authorized for issue in accordance with a resolution of the board of directors on  27 April 2023. 
2. Basis of preparation
2.1 Statement of complianceThese financial statements of the Bank have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and accounting requirement as dictated by the guide for financial publication 2017 issued by the Bank of Ghana. Except as otherwise specified by the guide for financial publication, the financial statements were prepared in accordance with IFRS.
2.2 Basis of measurementThe financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis except for the following material items that are measured at fair value in the  Statement of Financial Position:
 y Financial assets and liabilities held-for-trading.
 y Derivative financial instruments.
 y Equity investments.
2.3 Functional and presentation currency
 The  financial  statements are  presented in Ghana Cedis [GH¢], which is the functional and presentational currency of the Bank.
2.4 Presentation of financial statements
         The Bank  presents its statement of  financial position 
in order of liquidity. An analysis regarding recovery or settlement within 12 months after the reporting date (current )  and more than 12 months after the date is presented in note 37 of these financial statements.
2.5 Accounting policies
 The accounting policies adapted by the bank are consistent with  those of the previous financial year.
2.6 Foreign currency transactionsTransactions denominated in foreign currencies are  recorded  in  the  functional  currency  using the exchange rates prevailing at the date of the transactions. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated at the functional currency rate of exchange ruling at the reporting date.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from 
the  settlement  of  foreign  currency  transactions are recognized in profit or loss under the heading “trading revenue” . Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the translation at year-end exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognized in profit or loss under the heading “other operating income’’ .
The effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash 
equivalents held or due in a foreign currency is reported in the statement of cash flows as part of the reconciliation of cash and cash equivalents at the beginning and end of the period. This amount is   presented separately from cash flows   from operating, investing and financing activities and includes the differences,  if  any, had those cash flows  been reported  at end of period exchange rates.
2.7 Segmental reportingIFRS  8  requires the  identification of  operating segments to be on the basis of internal reports that are reviewed by an entity’s Chief Operating Decision Maker (CODM) to allocate resources to the segment and assess its performance. IFRS 8 requires entities whose shares or debts are traded publicly to produce a segmental report.
Societe Generale Ghana PLC is managed on a basis 
that takes account of the different business lines that dominate the operating activities of the Bank. Major business lines of the Bank are:
a. Retail banking.
b. Corporate banking.
c. Treasury.NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2022
58
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCThe banking activities of the Bank have been segmented 
into various business lines. The profitability of these business lines  is  assessed based on the profit or  loss statement produced. These are illustrated in Note 39.
2.8 Property, plant and equipment
 Properties in the course of construction for provision of services or administrative purposes are carried at cost, less any recognised impairment loss. Cost includes professional fees and, for qualifying assets, borrowing costs capitalised in accordance with the bank’s accounting policy. Such properties are classified to the appropriate categories of property, plant and equipment when completed and ready for intended use. Depreciation of these assets, on the same basis as other property assets, commences when the assets are ready for their intended use. 
Depreciation on revalued buildings is recognised in 
profit or loss. On the subsequent sale or retirement of a revalued property, the attributable revaluation surplus remaining in the properties revaluation reserve is transferred directly to retained earnings. 
Fixtures and equipment are stated at cost less 
accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses.
Depreciation is recognised so as to write off the cost 
or valuation of assets (other than freehold land and properties under construction) less their residual values over their useful lives, using the straight-line method. The estimated useful lives, residual values and depreciation method are reviewed at the end of each reporting period, with the effect of any changes in estimate accounted for on a prospective basis. 
The current annual depreciation rates for each class of 
property, plant and equipment are as follows:
Buildings                                                3.0% Furniture  and equipment               20.0%Computer                                               33.3%Household  furniture                         25.0%Motor  vehicles                                     33.3% 
Leasehold  land is  amortized over leased period
Right of use  assets are amortised  over the shorter of the  
lease term and the asset’s  useful life.
Freehold land is not depreciatedCosts   associated   with   routine   servicing   and 
maintenance of assets are expensed as incurred. Subsequent expenditure is only capitalized if it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the item will flow to the Bank.  
The carrying values of property and equipment are 
reviewed for indications of impairment annually, or when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. If any such indication exists and where the carrying values exceed the estimated recoverable amount, the assets or cash-generating units are written down to their recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount of property and equipment is 
the greater of fair value less costs to sell and value in use. In assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows  are discounted  to their present value using a  pre-tax  discount  rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.   
An item of property, plant and equipment is 
derecognized upon disposal or when no future economic benefits  are expected to arise from the continued use of the asset. Any gain or loss arising on derecognizing of the asset (calculated as the difference between the net disposal  proceeds and the carrying amount of the item) is included in profit or loss in the year the item is derecognized.
Residual values, useful lives and methods of depreciation 
for property and equipment are reviewed, and adjusted if appropriate, at each reporting date.
2.9 Intangible assets: computer software Costs incurred to acquire and bring to use specific computer software licenses are capitalized. Following initial recognition, intangible assets are carried at cost less accumulated amortization and any impairment losses. The amortization period and method for an intangible asset, in this case computer software, are reviewed at least at each reporting date. Changes in the expected useful life in the asset are accounted for by changing the amortization period or method, as appropriate, and treated as changes in accounting estimates. The amortization expense on the intangible assets is recognized in profit or loss in the expense category consistent with the function of the intangible asset. Amortisation is calculated using the straight line method on the basis of the expected useful lives of the assets which range between 3 and 5 years.
The carrying values of intangible assets are reviewed 
for indications of impairment annually or when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
If any such indication exists and where the carrying Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
59
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
values exceed the estimated recoverable amount, the 
assets or cash-generating units are written down to their recoverable amount.
 The recoverable amount of intangible assets is the greater of fair value less costs to sell and value in use. In assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows  are discounted  to their present  value using a pre-tax  discount  rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.
Gains or losses arising from de-recognition of an 
intangible asset are measured  as the difference between the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and are recognized in profit or loss when the asset is derecognized.
2.10 Provisions
The Bank recognizes provisions when it has a present obligation (legal or constructive) as a result of a past event and it is probable that an outflow of  resources   embodying   economic  benefits will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation. Where the Bank expects some or all of a provision to be reimbursed, the reimbursement is recognized as a separate asset but only when the reimbursement is virtually certain.
The expense relating to any provision is presented in 
profit or loss net of any reimbursement.
If the effect of the time value of money is material, 
provisions are determined by discounting the expected  future cash flows  at a pre-tax  rate that reflects current  market  assessments   of the time value of money and, where appropriate, the risks specific to the liability.
2.11 Employee benefitsThe Bank contributes to a three-tier defined contribution scheme on behalf of employees. The tier one and two are mandatory. The Bank contributes 10% towards the voluntary tier three plan.
2.12 Revenue
Revenue is recognized to the extent that it is probable that the economic benefits will flow to the Bank and the revenue can be reliably measured. The following  specific  recognition criteria are met before revenue is recognized:
a. Interest income
Under  IFRS 9 , interest income is recorded using the 
effective interest rate (EIR) method for all financial instruments measured at amortised cost and financial instruments designated at FVPL. Interest income  on interest bearing financial assets measured at FVOCI,  are also recorded by using the EIR method. The EIR is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash receipts through the expected life of the financial instrument or, when appropriate, a shorter period, to the net carrying amount of the financial asset. The EIR (and therefore, the amortised cost of the asset) is calculated by taking into account any discount or premium on acquisition, fees and costs that are an integral part of the EIR. The Bank recognises interest income using a rate of return that represents the best estimate of a constant rate of return over the expected life of the loan. Hence, it recognises the effect of potentially different interest rates charged at various stages, and other characteristics of the product life cycle (including prepayments, penalty interest and charges).
The Bank calculates interest income by applying the EIR 
to the gross carrying amount of financial assets other than credit-impaired assets.
If expectations regarding the cash flows on the financial 
asset are revised for reasons other than credit risk, the adjustment is booked as a positive or negative adjustment to the carrying amount of the asset in the statement of financial position with an increase or reduction in interest income. The adjustment is subsequently amortised through Interest and similar income in the statement of profit or loss.
When a financial asset becomes credit-impaired and 
is, therefore, regarded as ‘Stage 3’ , the Bank calculates interest income by applying the effective interest rate to the net amortised cost of the financial asset. If the financial assets cures and is no longer credit-impaired, the Bank reverts to calculating interest income on a gross basis.
For purchased or originated credit-impaired (POCI) 
financial assets the Bank calculates interest income by calculating the credit-adjusted EIR and applying that rate to the amortised cost of the asset. The credit-adjusted EIR is the interest rate that, at original recognition, discounts the estimated future cash flows (including credit losses) to the amortised cost of the POCI assets.
Interest income on all trading assets and financial 
assets mandatorily required to be measured at FVPL is recognised using the contractual interest rate in net trading income and Net gains/(losses) on financial assets at fair value through profit or loss, respectively.
b. Commissions and fees
Commission and fees, revenues and expenses that are 
integral part of financial instruments and are included in the measurement  of the effective interest rate are spread over the period of the financial  instruments. Commission and fees in respect of services are 
60
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
recognized in the profit or loss statement  when the 
related services are performed. The Bank’s revenue contracts do not typically include multiple performance obligations.
The Bank earns commission and fees from a diverse 
range of services provided to its customers. Fees  revenue is accounted  for as follows:
 y Revenue   is earned  on execution  of discrete act (such as funds transfers, special clearing and fees arising from negotiating transactions with third parties) is recognized as revenue when the act is completed.
 y Income earned  from the provision  of services (such as request for special statements, safe custody, COTs and advisory services) is recognized as revenue as the services are provided.
 y Fees  which forms an  integral part  of  the effective interest rate of a financial instrument (such as commitment and processing fees on corporate loans) is recognized as an adjustment to the effective interest rate.
c. Other operating income
This is made up of other operating income including dividend, profit or loss on sale of property, plant and equipment, other miscellaneous incomes and exchange gains.
2.13 Interest expense
Interest  expense is recognized in profit or loss for all interest-bearing financial instruments measured at amortized cost, including loans and advances, as interest accrues using the effective interest rate method.
The effective interest method is a method of calculating 
the amortized cost of a financial liability and of allocating the interest expense.
The effective interest rate is the rate that exactly 
discounts  the  estimated future cash payments over the expected life of the instrument or, when appropriate, a shorter period, to the net carrying amount of the financial liability.
The effective  interest rate is  calculated  on initial 
recognition of the financial liability,  estimating the future cash flows after considering all the contractual terms of the instrument. The calculation includes fees paid by the Bank that are an integral part of the the acquisition, issue or disposal of a financial instrument .
2.14 Taxation
Income tax charged to the profit or loss account for the year comprises current tax and deferred tax. Income tax is recognized in profit or loss except to the extent that it relates to items recognized directly in shareholders’ equity or other comprehensive income, in which case it is recognized in shareholders’ equity or other comprehensive income.
a. Corporate income tax
Current tax is the tax expected to be payable under the 
Income Tax Act, 2015  (Act 896) on the taxable profit for the year, calculated using the tax rates enacted or substantially enacted by the reporting date, and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous years. Current tax assets and liabilities  are offset when the Bank intends to settle on net basis and the legal right to set off exists.
Corporate income tax relating to items recognized 
directly in equity or other comprehensive income is recognized in equity or other comprehensive income and not in profit or loss.
b. Deferred income tax
Deferred tax liabilities are recognized for all taxable 
temporary differences, except:
 y Where  the deferred  tax liability arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or of an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination and, at the time of the transaction, affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss.
 y In  respect  of taxable temporary  differences associated with investments in subsidiaries, associates and interests in joint ventures, where the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax assets are recognized  for all deductible 
temporary differences, carry forward of unused tax credits and unused tax losses, to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the deductible  temporary  differences,  and the carry forward of unused tax credits and unused tax losses can be utilized, except:
 y Where the deferred  tax asset relating to the deductible  temporary  difference  arises from the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination and, at the time of the transaction,  affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss.
In  respect of  deductible temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries, associates and interests in joint ventures, deferred tax assets are recognized only to the extent that it is probable that the temporary differences will reverse in the foreseeable  future and taxable profit will be available against  which the temporary differences can be utilized.
Deferred tax is calculated using the rate expected to 
apply in the period in which the assets will be realized or 
61
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
the liabilities settled. Deferred tax assets and liabilities 
are offset when they arise in the same tax reporting entities and relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority, and when a legal right to set off exists in the entity.
The carrying amount of deferred income tax assets 
is reviewed at each reporting date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow all or part of the deferred income tax asset to be utilized.
Deferred tax relating to items recognized directly in 
equity or other comprehensive income is recognized in equity or other comprehensive income and not in profit or loss.
c. Value added Tax -VAT
Revenues, expenses and assets are recognized net of the 
amount of VAT except:
 y Where the value added tax incurred on a purchase of goods and services is not recoverable from the taxation authority, the value added tax is recognized as part of the cost of acquisition of the asset or as part of the expense item as applicable; and accounts receivable and payable are stated with the amount of value added tax included.
 y The net amount of value added tax recoverable from, or payable to, the Ghana Revenue Authority is included as part of receivable or payable in the statement of financial position.
2.15 National stabilization levyUnder the National Fiscal Stabilization Levy Act, 2013 of Ghana, financial institutions and some large firms were  required  to pay a levy of 5% of their profit before tax towards  fiscal stabilization with effect from July 2013. The Bank has complied with this statutory obligation.
2.16 Financial Sector Recovery LevyUnder the Financial Sector Recovery  Act, 2021 (Act 1067) of Ghana, Banks (excluding rural and community banks) were  required  to pay a levy of 5% of their profit before tax to raise revenue to support the financial sector reforms and for other matters. The Act was gazetted on 31 March, 2021. The Bank has complied with this 
statutory obligation. 
2.17 Classification and measurement of financial assets 
and liabilities
2.17.1  Recognition and initial measurementThe Bank on the date of origination or purchase recognizes loans, debt and equity securities, deposits and subordinated debentures at the fair value of consideration paid. Regular-way purchases and sales of financial assets are recognized on the settlement date. All other financial assets and liabilities, including derivatives, are initially recognized on the trade date at which the Bank becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
The initial measurement of a financial asset or liability 
is at fair value plus transaction costs that are directly attributable to its purchase or issuance. For instruments measured at fair value through profit or loss, transaction costs are recognized immediately in profit or loss.
Financial assets include both debt and equity 
instruments.
2.17.2  Debt instrumentsDebt instruments, including loans and debt securities, are classified into one of the following measurement categories:
 y Amortized cost;
 y Fair value through other comprehensive income (FVOCI); or
 y Fair value through profit or loss (FVTPL) for trading related assets
Classification of debt instruments is determined based on:
i. the business model under which the asset is held; and
ii. the contractual cash flow characteristics of the instrument
2.17.3  Business model assessmentBusiness model assessment involves determining whether financial assets are managed in order to generate cash flows from collection of contractual cash flows, selling financial assets or both. The Bank assesses business model at a portfolio level reflective of how group of assets are managed together to achieve a particular business objective. For the assessment of business model the Bank takes into consideration the following factors:
 y how the performance of assets in a portfolio is evaluated and reported to group heads and other key decision makers within the Bank’s business lines;
 y the risks that affect the performance of assets held within a business model and how those risks are managed;
 y whether the assets held for trading purposes i.e., assets that the Bank acquires or incurs principally for the purpose of selling or repurchasing in the near term, or holds as part of a portfolio that is 
62
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
managed together for short-term profit or position 
taking;
 y how compensation is determined for the Bank’s business lines’ management that manages the assets; and
 y the frequency and volume of sales in prior periods and expectations about future sales activity.
2.17.4  Cash flow characteristics assessment
The contractual cash flow characteristics assessment 
involves assessing the contractual features of an instrument to determine if they give rise to cash flows that are consistent with a basic lending arrangement. Contractual cash flows are consistent with a basic lending arrangement if they represent cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding (SPPI).
Principal is defined as the fair value of the instrument at 
initial recognition. Principal may change over the life of the instruments due to repayments.
Interest is defined as consideration for the time value of 
money and the credit risk associated with the principal amount outstanding and for other basic lending risks and costs (liquidity risk and administrative costs), as well as a profit margin.
In performing this assessment, the Bank takes into 
consideration contractual features that could change the amount or timing of contractual cash flows, such that the cash flows are no longer consistent with a basic lending arrangement. If the Bank identifies any contractual features that could modify the cash flows of the instrument such that they are no longer consistent with a basic lending arrangement, the related financial asset is classified and measured at FVTPL. Non pledged trading assets and derivative assets of the bank are measured under FVTPL whilst Loans and advances are measured under amortised cost based on their cashflow characteristics and business model.
2.17.5  Debt instruments measured at amortized costDebt instruments are measured at amortized cost if they are held within a business model whose objective is to hold for collection of contractual cash flows where those cash flows represent solely payments of principal and interest. After initial measurement, debt instruments in this category are carried at amortized cost using the effective interest rate method. The effective interest rate is the rate that discounts estimated future cash payments or receipts through the expected life of the financial asset to the gross carrying amount of a financial asset. Amortized cost is calculated taking into account any discount or premium on acquisition, transaction costs and fees that are an integral part of the effective interest rate. Investment securities are measured under amortised cost.
Impairment on debt instruments measured at 
amortized cost is calculated using the expected credit loss approach. Loans and debt securities measured at amortized cost are presented net of the allowance for credit losses in the statement of financial position.
Debt instruments measured at FVTPL include assets 
held for trading purposes, assets held as part of a portfolio managed on a fair value basis and assets whose cash flows do not represent payments that are solely payments of principal and interest. These instruments are measured at fair value in the Statement of Financial Position, with transaction costs recognized immediately in the profit or loss statement as part of net income from other financial instruments carried at fair value. Realized and unrealized gains and losses are recognized as part of Non-interest income in the profit or loss statement. Non pledged trading assets and derivative assets of the bank are measured under FVTPL.
2.17.6  Debt instruments measured at FVOCIDebt instruments are  measured at FVOCI only  if  the assets  are held within a business model whose objective is achieved by  collecting contractual cash flows and selling financial assets; and the contractual terms of the financial asset give rise on specified dates to cash flows that are Solely Payments of Principal and Interest (SPPI) and such assets have not been designated as at  FVTPL.
In addition, on initial recognition, the Bank may 
irrevocably designate a financial asset that otherwise meets the requirements to be measured at amortised cost or at FVOCI as at FVTPL  if doing so eliminates or significantly reduces an accounting mismatch that would otherwise arise.
2.17.7  Equity instrumentsEquity instruments are measured at FVTPL, unless an election is made to designate them at FVOCI upon purchase. For equity instruments measured at FVTPL, changes in fair value are recognized as part of Non-interest income in the profit or loss statement. An election has not been made to designate any of the equity instrument at FVOCI as such all equity instruments are measured at FVTPL in the current year.
The Bank can elect to classify non-trading equity 
instruments at FVOCI. This election will be used for certain equity investments for strategic or longer term investment purposes. The FVOCI election is made upon initial recognition, on an instrument-by-instrument basis and once made is irrevocable. Gains and losses on these instruments including when derecognized/sold are recorded in OCI and are not subsequently 
63
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
reclassified to the profit or loss. Dividends received are 
recorded in other operating expenses/income  in the  Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income.  Any transaction costs incurred upon purchase of the security are added to the cost basis of the security and are not reclassified to the  profit or loss on sale of the security. Equity instruments at FVOCI are not subject to an impairment assessment. An election has not been made to designate any of the equity instrument at FVOCI as such all equity instruments are measured at FVTPL in the current year.
2.17.8  Financial liabilitiesFinancial liabilities  are classified as non-trading, held for trading or designated as held at fair value through profit or loss. Non-trading liabilities are recorded at amortized cost applying the effective interest method.  Held for trading liabilities or liabilities designated as held at fair value through profit or loss, are accounted for as indicated above. A financial liability (trading or other) is removed from the balance sheet when it is extinguished – that is, when the obligation is discharged, cancelled or expired. The condition is met when the liability is settled by paying the creditor, or when the debtor is released from primary responsibility for the liability either by process of law or by the creditor. A gain or loss on extinguishment of a financial liability is recognised in the profit or loss statement. Any net cash flow in relation to the restructuring of financial liabilities is an adjustment to the debt’s carrying amount and is amortised over the remaining life of the liability.
2.17.9  Impairment
a. Scope
The Bank applies a three-stage approach to measure allowance for credit losses, using an expected credit loss approach as required under IFRS 9, for the following categories of financial instruments that are not measured at fair value through profit or loss:
 y Amortized cost financial assets;
 y Debt securities classified as at FVOCI;
 y Off-balance sheet loan commitments; and
 y Financial guarantee contracts.
Financial assets migrate through three stages based on the change in credit risk since initial recognition.
b. Post COVID 19 and DDEP Events
SG Ghana provided financial support to its Clients 
during the pandemic crises in order to support them financially to make a good impact in the fight against the pandemic. Clients in Corporate and Retail whose sectors or activities were affected by the pandemic issues received reliefs/moratoriums from the Bank. Following the intensified monitoring system during the crises period, some clients who received moratoriums have fully paid off their loans while some are on course with their repayment schedule with business returning to normal.
The provisions for loans in the “Other Loans Especially 
Mentioned” (OLEM) category which moved from ten percent to five percent during the pandemic per regulatory directives have been reverted to ten percent post COVID. The Bank’s portfolio was relatively resilient, thus the impact on our impairments was generally low.
The ECL for 2022 was computed on the assumption that 
the state is no longer able to service its debts, therefore, some significant decrease will have to be made in the debt, as well as in the spendings, so that the restructured debt becomes again, sustainable.
Impairment was computed on the bond exposure with 
the government,Provisions were also made on the loans related to the sovereign,The other exposures to the central bank (Bills and deposits), considering their very short-term nature and their function as part of the liquidity management of the bank and of the whole banking industry, are not provisioned, as we expect no losses on such exposures.
c. Expected credit loss impairment model
The Bank’s allowance for credit losses calculations 
are outputs of models with a number of underlying assumptions regarding the choice of variable inputs and their interdependencies. The expected credit loss impairment model reflects the present value of all cash shortfalls related to default events either (i) over the following twelve months or (ii) over the expected life of a financial instrument depending on credit deterioration from inception. The allowance for credit losses reflects an unbiased, probability-weighted outcome which considers multiple scenarios based on reasonable and supportable forecasts.
This impairment model measures credit loss allowances 
using a three-stage approach based on the extent of credit deterioration since origination:
 y Stage 1 – Where there has not been a significant increase in credit risk (SIR) since initial recognition of a financial instrument, an amount equal to 12 months expected credit loss is recorded. The expected credit loss is computed using a probability of default occurring over the next 12 months. For those instruments with a remaining maturity 
64
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
of less than 12 months, a probability of default 
corresponding to remaining term to maturity is used.
 y Stage 2 – When a financial instrument experiences a SIR subsequent to origination but is not considered to be in default, it is included in Stage 2. This requires the computation of expected credit loss based on the probability of default over the remaining estimated life of the financial instrument.
 y Stage 3 – Financial instruments that are considered to be in default are included in this stage. Similar to Stage 2, the allowance for credit losses captures the lifetime expected credit losses.
d. Measurement of expected credit loss
The probability of default (PD), exposure at default (EAD), and loss given default (LGD) inputs used to estimate expected credit losses are modelled based on macroeconomic variables that are most closely related with credit losses in the relevant portfolio. The bank’s portfolios have been segmented to ensure that they are consistent in terms of risk characteristics and to ensure better correlation with  local macroeconomic variables. This segmentation factors in all specific characteristics associated with the bank’s activities.
Details of these statistical parameters/inputs are as 
follows:
 y PD – The probability of default is an estimate of the likelihood of default over a given time horizon. A default may only happen at a certain time over the remaining estimated life, if the facility has not been previously derecognized and is still in the portfolio.
 y EAD – The exposure at default is an estimate of the exposure at a future default date, taking into account expected changes in the exposure after the reporting date, including repayments of principal and interest, whether scheduled by contract or otherwise, expected drawdowns on committed facilities, and accrued interest from missed payments.
 y LGD – The loss given default is an estimate of the loss arising in the case where a default occurs at a given time. It is based on the difference between the contractual cash flows due and those that the lender would expect to receive, including from the realization of any collateral. It is usually expressed as a percentage of the EAD.
e. Forward-looking information
The Bank on a yearly basis analyses trends of probability of default, default rates, impairment expense amongst others and how these have evolved in line with the evolution of both historic and future key macro-economic variables. The key macro-economic variables that may have influenced risk levels include GDP growth, Inflation rates, unemployment rates, exchange rates amongst others.  A study of both parameters is done to establish any possible correlation which then results in the application of an overlay. 
f. Macroeconomic factors
In its models, the Bank relies on a broad range of forward 
looking information as economic inputs, such as: GDP growth, inflation rates and central bank base rates. The inputs and models used for calculating expected credit losses may not always capture all characteristics of the market at the date of the financial statements. To reflect this, qualitative adjustments or overlays may be made as temporary adjustments using expert credit judgement.
The Bank determines allowance for credit losses using 
three probability-weighted forward-looking scenarios. The Bank considers both internal and external sources of information in order to achieve an unbiased measure of the scenarios used. The forecasts are created using internal and external models/data which are then modified to reflect future direction of relevant economic variables as well as a representative range of other possible forecast scenarios.
The most likely outcome is aligned with information 
used by the Bank for other purposes such as strategic planning and budgeting.  The Bank has identified and documented key drivers of credit risk and credit losses for each portfolio of financial instruments and, using an analysis of historical data, has estimated relationships between macro-economic variables, credit risk and credit losses.
g. Assessment of significant increase in credit risk 
(SIR)
At each reporting date, the Bank assesses whether there has been a significant increase in credit risk for exposures since initial recognition by comparing the risk of default occurring over the remaining expected life from the reporting date and the date of initial recognition. The assessment considers borrower-specific quantitative and qualitative information without consideration of collateral, and the impact of forward-looking macroeconomic factors.
The common assessments for SIR on retail and 
non-retail portfolios include macroeconomic outlook, management judgement, delinquency and monitoring. Forward looking macroeconomic factors are a key component of the macroeconomic outlook. The importance and relevance of each specific macroeconomic factor depends on the type of product, characteristics of the financial instruments and the 
65
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
borrower . Quantitative models may not always be able 
to capture all reasonable and supportable information that may indicate a significant increase in credit risk. Qualitative factors may be assessed to supplement the gap. Examples of situations include changes in adjudication criteria for a particular group of borrowers; changes in portfolio composition and natural disasters impacting certain portfolios. With regards to delinquency and monitoring, there is a rebuttable presumption that the credit risk of the financial instrument has increased since initial recognition when contractual payments are more than 30 days overdue.
Retail portfolio – For retail exposures, a significant 
increase in credit risk cannot be assessed using forward looking information at an individual account level. Therefore, the assessment must be done at the segment level. Segment migration thresholds exist for each PD model by product which considers the proportionate change in PD as well as the absolute change in PD. The thresholds used for PD migration are reviewed and assessed at least annually, unless there is a significant change in credit risk management practices in which case the review is brought forward.
Non-retail portfolio – The Bank uses a risk rating scale 
(IG codes) for its non-retail exposures. All non-retail exposures have an IG code assigned that reflects the probability of default of the borrower. Both borrower specific and non-borrower specific (i.e macroeconomic) forward looking information is considered and reflected in the IG rating. Significant increase in credit risk is evaluated based on the migration of the exposures among IG codes.
h. Expected life
When measuring expected credit loss, the Bank 
considers the maximum contractual period over which the Bank is exposed to credit risk. All contractual terms are considered when determining the expected life, including prepayment, and extension and rollover options. For certain revolving credit facilities,the expected life is estimated based on the period over which the Bank is exposed to credit risk and how the credit losses are mitigated by management actions.
Presentation of allowance for credit losses in the 
Statement of Financial Position
 y Financial assets measured at amortized cost: as a deduction from the gross carrying amount of the financial assets;
 y Debt instruments measured at fair value through other comprehensive income: no allowance is recognized in the Statement of Financial Position because the carrying value of these assets is their fair value. However, the allowance determined is presented in the accumulated other comprehensive income;
 y Off-balance sheet credit risks include undrawn lending commitments, letters of credit and letters of guarantee: as a provision in other liabilities.
i. Modified financial assets
If the terms of a financial asset are modified or an existing financial asset is replaced with a new one, an assessment is made to determine if the financial asset should be derecognized. Where the modification does not result in derecognition, the date of origination continues to be used to determine SIR. Where modification results in derecognition, the modified financial asset is considered to be a new asset.
j. Definition of default
The Bank considers a financial instrument to be in default 
as a result of one or more loss events that occurred after the date of initial recognition of the instrument and the loss event has a negative impact on the estimated future cash flows of the instrument that can be reliably estimated. This includes events that indicate:
 y significant financial difficulty of the borrower;
 y default or delinquency in interest or principal payments;
 y high probability of the borrower entering a phase of bankruptcy or a financial reorganization;
 y measurable decrease in the estimated future cash flows from the loan or the underlying assets that back the loan.
The Bank considers that default has occurred and classifies the financial asset as impaired when it is more than 90 days past due unless reasonable and supportable information demonstrates that a more lagging default criterion is appropriate.
k. Write-off policy
The Bank writes off an impaired financial asset (and 
the related impairment allowance), either partially or in full, when there is no realistic prospect of recovery. Where financial assets are secured, write-off is generally after receipt of any proceeds from the realization of security. In circumstances where the net realizable value of any collateral has been determined and there is no reasonable expectation of further recovery, write-off  may be earlier. Credit card receivables 180 days past due, are written-off. In subsequent periods, any recoveries of amounts previously written off are credited to the provision for credit losses in the profit or loss statement.
66
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
l. Restructured credit
Loans issued by the Bank may be subject to restructuring 
with the aim of securing the collection of the principal and interest by adjusting the contractual terms of the loan (e.g. reduced interest rate, rescheduled loan payments, partial debt forgiveness or additional collateral). Assets may only qualify for restructuring where the borrower is experiencing financial difficulties or insolvency (whether the borrower has already become insolvent or is certain to become insolvent if the loan is not restructured).
Where they still pass the SPPI test, restructured loans 
are still recorded in the Statement of Financial Position and their amortised cost prior to impairment is adjusted for a discount representing the negative difference between the present value of the new contractual cash flows resulting from the restructuring of the loan and the amortised cost prior to impairment less any partial debt forgiveness. This discount, representing earnings foregone, is booked to cost of risk in the Statement of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income. As a result, the associated interest income is still subsequently recognised at the initial effective interest rate of the loans. Post-restructuring, these assets are systematically classified in Stage 3 for impairment (credit-impaired exposures), as the borrowers are deemed to be in default. Stage 3 classification is maintained for at least one year, or longer if the Bank is uncertain that the borrowers will be able to meet their commitments. Once the loan is no longer classified in stage 3, the assessment of the significant increase of credit risk will be performed by comparing the credit risk level at the closing date and the level at the initial recognition date of the loan before restructuring.
m. Repossessed Properties /Collaterals
In its normal course of business, the Bank does not 
physically repossess properties or other assets in its loan portfolio, but engages external agents to recover funds, generally at auction, to settle outstanding debt. Any surplus funds are returned to the customers/obligors. As a result of this practice, the properties under legal repossession processes are not recorded on the Statement of Financial position.
2.18 Regulatory credit reserveTo cater for any excess of Bank of Ghana’s credit loss provision requirements over loans and advances impairments based on IFRS principles, a transfer is made from the income surplus (distributable reserves) to a non- distributable reserve in the statement of changes in equity, being the Regulatory Credit Reserve.
The non-distributable Regulatory Credit Reserve ensures 
that minimum regulatory provisioning requirements as 
established by the  Bank of Ghana are maintained.2.19 Dividend
Dividends declared are treated as an appropriation of 
profit in  the year of approval while dividends proposed  are disclosed as a note to the financial statements.
2.20 Cash and cash equivalentsFor the purposes  of the statement  of cash flow, cash and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand, cash and balances with the Central Bank of Ghana and amounts  due from banks  and other financial institutions.
2.21 Borrowing
Borrowings by the Bank are initially recognized at fair value and there after stated at amortized cost. Associated net transaction costs of borrowings are recognized in  the Statement of profit or loss and Other Comprehensive income  over the maturity period of the borrowings.
2.22 Repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements Securities sold under agreements to repurchase at a  specified future date are not derecognized in  the Statement of Financial Position as the Bank retains substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership. The corresponding cash received is recognized  in  the statement  of financial position as an asset with corresponding obligation to return it, including accrued interest as a liability within Cash collateral on securities lent and repurchase agreements,  reflecting the transaction’s  economic substance  as a loan to the Bank. The difference between the sale and repurchase prices is treated as interest expense and is accrued over the life of agreement using the Effective Interest Rate (EIR). When the counterparty has the right to sell or re- pledge the securities, the Bank reclassifies those securities in its statement  of financial position to Financial assets held for trading pledged as collateral or to Financial investments FVOCI pledged as collateral, as appropriate.
Conversely, securities purchased under agreements to 
resell at a specified  future date are not recognized in the statement of financial  position. The consideration paid, including accrued interest, is recorded  in the statement of financial position, within Cash collateral on securities borrowed and reverse repurchase agreements, reflecting the transaction’s economic substance as a loan by the Bank. The difference between the purchase  and resale prices is recorded in Net interest income and is accrued over the life of the agreement using the EIR.
If   securities   purchased   under   agreement   to resell 
are subsequently sold to third parties, the obligation to return the securities is recorded as a short sale within Financial liabilities held for trading and measured at fair value with any gains or losses included in Net trading revenue.
67
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
2.23 Financial guarantees, letters of credit and undrawn 
loan commitmentsFinancial guarantees are initially recognised in the financial statements (within Provisions) at fair value, being the premium received. Subsequent to initial recognition, the Bank’s liability under each guarantee is measured at the higher of the amount initially recognised less cumulative amortisation recognised in the Statement of profit or loss and Other Comprehensive income. The premium received is recognised in the Statement of profit or loss and Other Comprehensive income in Net fees and commission income on a straight line basis over the life of the guarantee.
Undrawn loan commitments and letters of credits are 
commitments under which, over the duration of the commitment, the Bank is required to provide a loan with pre-specified terms to the customer.
2.24 Other AssetsOther current assets is a default classification for assets which cannot be classified under any of the major assets classification on the face of the account, or are  immaterial and need to be aggregated for presentation in a single line item in the Statement of Financial Position . Accounts included in the other current assets classification may includes inventory of consumables, prepayments and sundry debtors.
3. Significant Accounting Estimates, Assumptions & JudgmentsThe preparation of financial statements, in conformity with IFRS, requires management to make estimates, apply judgments and make assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the reporting period. Estimates made by management are based on historical experience and other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable. Key areas where management has made difficult, complex or subjective judgments, often as a result of matters that are inherently uncertain, include those relating to the allowance for impairment(Note 2.17.9),  the fair value of financial instruments (note 36),depreciation rates on PPE and intangible assets (Note 22a) and legal provisions( Note 34). The key areas stated do not reflect all areas where management may apply judgement.  While management makes its best estimates and assumptions, actual results could differ from these estimates and assumptions.
3.1 Deferred tax assetsDeferred tax assets are recognized for all unused tax losses to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will  be available against which the losses can be  utilized.  Significant management judgment is required to determine the amount of deferred tax assets that can be recognized based upon the likely timing and level of future taxable profits together with future tax planning strategies. Deferred tax is shown in Note 15a.
4. Application of new and revised International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRSs)
4.1 Standards and interpretations in issue but not yet effective
 The new and amended standards and interpretations that are issued, but not yet effective, up to the date of issuance of the Bank’s financial statements are disclosed below. The Bank intends to adopt these new and amended standards and interpretations, if applicable, when they become effective.
IFRS 17 – Insurance contracts In May 2017, the IASB issued IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts (IFRS 17), a comprehensive new accounting standard for insurance contracts covering recognition and measurement, presentation and disclosure. Once effective, IFRS 17 will replace IFRS 4 Insurance Contracts (IFRS 4) that was issued in 2005. IFRS 17 applies to all types of insurance contracts (i.e., life, non-life, direct insurance and re-insurance), regardless of the type of entities that issue them, as well as to certain guarantees and financial instruments with discretionary participation features. 
A few scope exceptions will apply. The overall objective of IFRS 
17 is to provide an accounting model for insurance contracts that is more useful and consistent for insurers. In contrast to the requirements in IFRS 4, which are largely based on grandfathering previous local accounting policies, IFRS 17 provides a comprehensive model for insurance contracts, covering all relevant accounting aspects. The core of IFRS 17 is the general model, supplemented by:  
 y A specific adaptation for contracts with direct participation features (the variable fee approach) 
 y A simplified approach (the premium allocation approach) mainly for short-duration contracts 
IFRS 17 is effective for reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023, with comparative figures required. Early application is permitted, provided the entity also applies IFRS 9 and IFRS 15 on or before  the date it first applies IFRS 17. This standard is not applicable to the Company. 
68
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Amendments to IAS 1: Classification of Liabilities as Current 
or Non-current In January 2020, the IASB issued amendments to paragraphs 69 to 76 of IAS 1 to specify the requirements for classifying liabilities as current or non-current. The amendments clarify:  • What is meant by a right to defer settlement • That a right to defer must exist at the end of the reporting period • That classification is unaffected by the likelihood that an entity will exercise its deferral right • That only if an embedded derivative in a convertible liability is itself an equity instrument would the terms of a liability not impact its classification  The amendments are effective for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023 and must be applied retrospectively. The Company is currently assessing the impact the amendments will have on current practice and whether existing loan agreements may require renegotiation.  
Definition of Accounting Estimates - Amendments to IAS 8 
In February 2021, the IASB issued amendments to IAS 8, in which it introduces a definition of ‘accounting estimates’ . The amendments clarify the distinction between changes in accounting estimates and changes in accounting policies and the correction of errors. Also, they clarify how entities use measurement techniques and inputs to develop accounting estimates.  The amendments are effective for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023 and apply  to changes in accounting policies and changes in accounting estimates that occur on or after the start of that period. Earlier application is permitted as long as this fact is disclosed. The amendments are not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Disclosure of Accounting Policies - Amendments to IAS 1 and 
IFRS Practice Statement 2 In February 2021, the IASB issued amendments to IAS 1 and IFRS Practice Statement 2 Making Materiality Judgements, in which it provides guidance and examples to help entities apply materiality judgements to accounting policy disclosures. The amendments aim to help entities provide accounting policy disclosures that are more useful by replacing the requirement for entities to disclose their ‘significant’ accounting policies with  a requirement to disclose their ‘material’ accounting policies and adding guidance on how entities apply the concept of materiality in making decisions about accounting policy disclosures. The amendments to IAS 1 are applicable for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023 with earlier application permitted. Since the amendments to the Practice Statement 2 provide non-mandatory guidance  on the application of the definition of material to accounting policy information, an effective date for these amendments is not necessary. The Company is currently revisiting their accounting policy information disclosures to ensure consistency with the amended requirements. 
Deferred Tax related to Assets and Liabilities arising from a 
Single Transaction - Amendments to IAS 12 In May 2021, the Board issued amendments to IAS 12, which narrow the scope of the initial recognition exception under IAS 12, so that it no longer applies to transactions that give rise to equal taxable and deductible temporary differences. The amendments should be applied to transactions that occur on or after the beginning of the earliest comparative period presented. In addition, at the beginning of the earliest comparative period presented, a deferred tax asset (provided that sufficient taxable profit is available) and a deferred tax liability should also be recognised for all deductible and taxable temporary differences associated with leases and decommissioning obligations.  The Company is currently assessing the impact of the amendments.
69
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC5. Interest income 
Placements  19,366,779   16,565,661 
Investments securities     86,854,474   95,664,661   
Loans and advances    553,275,976   398,762,607 
       659,497,229          510,992,929   
Interest income recognition was based on the effective interest rate (EIR).
6. Interest and similar expense Savings accounts    46,004,614   39,024,090   
Current accounts  1,163,349   586,060  
Term deposits    46,434,895    52,470,259   
Borrowings   41,327,818   17,910,008  
      134,930,676        109,990,417  
Interest expense recognition was based on the effective interest rate (EIR).
7. Fees and commission income 2022   2021 
  GH¢   GH¢ 
Domestic operations  82,069,305   62,985,482   
Cards operations  23,102,818   14,489,734   
  105,172,123     77,475,216   
Fees and commission income was earned at a point in time    
   
8. Fees and commission expense   2022  2021 
 GH¢   GH¢ 
Cards operations expense  30,020,366      24,411,185   
Cheque books expense  336,169     283,355   
Cash collection expense  5,957,417       2,557,668   
    36,313,952       27,252,208   
Fees and commission expenses were incurred at a point in time
9. Net trading revenue    
Forex trading gains   665,023,739   160,227,667   
Forex trading losses  (569,289,738)  (119,434,315)
  95,734,001  40,793,352   Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
2022   
GH¢   2021 
 GH¢
2022
GH¢2021
GH¢2022 
 GH¢ 2021 
 GH¢
70
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC10. Net income from other financial instruments carried at fair value   
Gain from swap   34,628,103   32,561,315   
Gain on bond trading   28,850,419   20,302,059   
Fair value on equity instruments (Note 19a)  626,166   (27,729) 
    64,104,688   52,835,645   
11. Other operating incomeExchange loss     (60,711,093)  (1,320,467) 
Rent/hiring fees   44,463   39,960   
Postages  115,675   94,351   
Miscellaneous and others*    108,869,525   92,625,692   
     48,318,570   91,439,536 
* Included in this amount is a figure of GH ¢ 96,588,162 being prior year provision reversals( 2021 - GH ¢ 92,477,629).  The provisions relate to Group technological 
service fees which were reversed following regulatory non- approvals and received invoices being above authorized payment limits. 
12. Net impairment loss on financial assets   
Specific impairment    169,401,266   33,976,556   
Portfolio  impairment    116,578,063   8,450,423  
Total impairment    285,979,329   42,426,979   
Recoveries   (1,242,289)  (9,019,398)
Net impairment    284,737,040   33,407,581   
 
12a. Total impairment
Cash and cash equivalents (Note 17c)  1,029,478    243,616   
Investment securites   68,253,161   208,198     
Loans and advances (Note 20f)     201,129,088  30,474,333   
Lcs and guarantees ( off balance sheet liabilities) (Note 33b)    7,200,038    (2,287,247)
Equity Investment  8,367,564    13,788,080 
Total Impairment   285,979,329   42,426,979   
*Included in the expected credit loss for loans and advances is an amount of GH¢1,304,750  in respect of loans written off in the current year.
13. Personnel expenses    
     
Salaries, bonuses and staff allowances    128,244,437   108,047,866    
Social security fund contribution    7,872,312   7,117,426   
Provident fund contribution   6,041,103   5,602,865   
Medicals   4,910,947   4,635,152   
Insurance   1,157,989   860,677   
Termination expenses   -     3,918,729     
Training   515,202   539,124  
Other employee costs   17,389,854   1,214,738  
Directors emoluments (Note 13a)    5,489,167   3,580,290    
    171,621,011   135,516,867   Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
2022   
GH¢   2021 
  GH¢
2022   
GH¢ 
2022   
GH¢ 
2022   
GH¢  
2022   
GH¢   2021 
  GH¢
  2021 
  GH¢
  2021 
  GH¢
  2021 
  GH¢
71
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCThe average number of persons employed by the Bank during the year was 542  (2021: 537).
 The Bank contributes to a three-tier defined contribution plan. The employee pays 5.5% and the Bank pays 13% making a 
total of 18.5%. The Bank transfers 13.5% to the first tier , 5% to a privately managed and mandatory second tier for lump sum benefit . The third tier is a voluntary provident fund and personal pension scheme to which the Bank contributes 10% of staff basic salary.
13a. Directors emoluments   2022 2021 
 GH¢   GH¢
Directors salaries and allowances      3,425,044    2,628,396   
Directors expenses  257,658   134,027   
Directors fees  1,806,465    817,867  
     5,489,167   3,580,290   
14. Other operating expenses 2022  2021  
 GH¢   GH¢ 
Donations   252,719   442,883   
Advertising and marketing   2,818,104   4,509,393   
Office expenses (Note 14a)   45,006,678   39,250,437  
Administrative expenses  10,580,306   8,795,286   
General expenses  (Note 14b)    78,747,873   97,597,308   
    137,405,680   150,595,307   
14a. Office expenses  2022  2021  
 GH¢   GH¢ 
Utilities    7,194,915   6,588,880   
Maintenance of computer software & hardware   13,523,149   11,286,715   
Network  and communication   6,361,486   4,936,948   
Office and computer stationery    1,286,409   948,498   
Repairs to furniture & equipment    2,250,806   2,154,873   
Resource hiring     5,997,554   5,880,750   
Other  office expenses   8,392,359   7,453,773   
   45,006,678  39,250,437   
14b. General expenses 2022  2021  
 GH¢   GH¢
Professional  fees and charges     3,462,329   3,389,445   
Repairs and rental of equipment  2,740,006   2,655,211   
IT  support services  49,153,923   63,350,166   
Other general expenses   23,391,615   28,202,486   
   78,747,873   97,597,308   Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
72
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC14c. Auditors’ remuneration 2022  2021  
 GH¢   GH¢ 
 Statutory audit   674,000   613,813   
Auditors’ remuneration in relation to statutory audit amounted to  GH¢  674,000  (2021 : GH¢ 613,813).  
15. Income tax expense 2022   2021 
  GH¢  GH¢
Corporate tax (24a)       (105,427,376)  (83,513,629)
Deferred tax (15a)       62,721,417   11,528,917  
National stabilization levy (15b)     (8,419,216)  (14,098,333)
Financial sector recovery levy (15c)       (8,419,216)  (11,554,021)
Charge to statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income      (59,544,391)  (97,637,066)
 
15a. Deferred tax  2022   2021  
 GH¢   GH¢
 Balance as at 1 January    27,010,706   15,309,433  
Tax expense recognised in profit or loss during the year      62,721,417   11,528,917   
Tax recognised in OCI during the year    126,970   172,356  
Balance as at 31 December                                                                                                                  89,859,093                    27,010,706 
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are attributable to the following:
2021 2022
Assets
GH¢Liabilities
GH¢Net
GH¢Assets
GH¢Liabilities
GH¢Net
GH¢Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Property, plant and equipment  -     (41,223,420)  (41,223,420)  -     (41,223,420)  (41,223,420)
Other timing differences          
 Capital allowance  - (1,945,196)  (1,945,196) -  (229,116)  (229,116)
 Other provisions  133,173,684   -     133,173,684   68,736,187   -     68,736,187 
FVOCI instrument  -     (145,975)  (145,975)   (272,945)  (272,945)
Net tax assets/(liabilities) 133,173,684   (43,314,591) 89,859,093   68,736,187   41,725,481)  27,010,706 
73
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC15b. National stabilization levy  2022 2021 
 GH¢  GH¢
Analysis of charge for the year
Charge to statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income       (8,419,216)  (14,098,333) 
 
In accordance with the National Fiscal Stabilization Act, 2013 (Act 862) all companies in Banking, Non Bank Financial Institutions, Insurance, Mining, Brewery 
and Communication are supposed to pay a levy of 5% of profit before tax towards National Fiscal Stability. 
  
15c. Financial sector recovery Levy 2022 2021
  GH¢ GH¢
  Analysis of charge for the year 
 Charge to statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income      (8,419,216)  (11,554,021)
 The Financial Sector Recovery Levy was institituted as a levy on banks to raise revenue to support the financial sector reforms and to provide for related matters. Thus , In accordance with the Financial Sector Recovery Levy Act ,2021 Act 1067 , all Banking Instituitions (excluing rural banks and community banks) are required  to pay 5% of profit before tax as a Levy . The Act was gazetted on 31 March,2021.
15d. Factors affecting the corporate tax charged for the year
A reconciliation of the charge that would result from applying the standard Ghana corporate tax rate to profit before tax to 
tax charge for the year is given below:   
 2022 2021 
 GH¢  GH¢
Pretax profit for the year       168,384,318    281,966,699   
Tax charge thereon at Ghana corporate tax rate of 25%      42,096,079    70,491,675   
Factors affecting Charge:  
Non deductible expenses   609,880   1,493,036   
National Stabilisation Levy       8,419,216    14,098,335   
Financial Sector Recovery Levy      8,419,216    11,554,021 
Tax on corporate profit (Note 15)      59,544,391    97,637,067 
Effective Corporate Income tax rate 35.4% 34.6%
The tax charge on profit for the year is based on Ghana’s corporate tax rate of 25% . A National Stabilisation Levy and a Financial Sector Recovery Levy are also 
both charged at 5% each (2021 : Corporate tax 25%, National Stabilisation Levy 5%, Financial Sector Recovery Levy 5%).
   
16. Earnings per share
Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the profit after tax for the year attributable to the equity holders of the Bank by the weighted average number of shares, held during the year after deducting treasury shares.
The following table shows the income and share data used in the calculation of the basic earnings per share:
   
 2022 2021
Profit attributable to shareholders of the Bank (GH¢)     108,839,926   184,329,633   
Number of Shares  
Weighted Average number of oustanding ordinary shares   709,141,367   709,141,367    
Basic Earning per Share (GH¢)       0.153   0.260    
Diluted Earnings per Share (GH¢)       0.153   0.260  
Diluted Earnings per Share
The Bank has no category of dilutive potential ordinary shares.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
74
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC17. Cash and cash equivalents 2022 2021 
 GH¢  GH¢
 Cash on hand and cash balances with Bank of Ghana (Note 17a)   1,368,343,534   681,248,249
 Due from banks and other institutions (Note 17b)   584,228,294   283,381,957
 Gross cash and cash equivalent    1,952,571,828   964,630,206
 Less impairment   (1,698,762)  (669,284)
    1,950,873,066   963,960,922  
17a. Cash on hand and cash balances with Bank of Ghana 2022 2021 
 GH¢  GH¢
 Cash on hand   149,175,013   122,795,991   
Balance with Bank of Ghana   1,219,168,521   558,452,258   
  1,368,343,534   681,248,249   
17b. Due from banks and other institutions 2022 2021 
 GH¢  GH¢
 
Nostro account balances   538,002,647   182,786,981   
Items in course of collection   46,225,647   10,594,976  
Placement with local banks  -     90,000,000 
   584,228,294   283,381,957  
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to cash and cash equivalents is as follows:
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk based on the Bank’s internal credit rating system and 
year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of impairment allowances.  
2022 (GH¢) Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Individual Individual Individual 
Cash and cash equivalents   1,952,571,828   -     -     1,952,571,828   
Total   1,952,571,828   -     -     1,952,571,828   
2022 (GH¢) Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Individual Individual Individual 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2022 964,630,206   -     -     964,630,206   
New assets originated or purchased 1,952,571,828   -     -     1,952,571,828   
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs) (964,630,206)  -     -     (964,630,206)
Amounts written off  -     -     -     -   
Total 1,952,571,828   -     -     1,952,571,828  Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
75
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC2021 (GH¢) Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Individual Individual Individual
 
Cash and cash equivalents     964,630,206   -     -     964,630,206    
Total     964,630,206   -     -     964,630,206   
2021 (GH¢)  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Individual Individual Individual 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021 1,562,409,284   -     -     1,562,409,284   
New assets originated or purchased 964,630,206   -     -     964,630,206  
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)   (1,562,409,284)  -     -     (1,562,409,284) 
Amounts written off  -     -     -     -   
Total 964,630,206   -     -    964,630,206  
 
 
17c. Impairment allowance for cash and cash equivalents 2022 2021 
 GH¢  GH¢
Opening balance  669,284   425,668   
Charge for the year    1,029,478   243,616   
Closing stock of provision   1,698,762   669,284  
2022 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Individual Individual Individual
ECL allowance as at 1 January 2022 669,284   -     -     669,284   
New assets originated or purchased 1,698,761   -     -     1,698,761  
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs) (669,284)  -     -     (669,284)  
Amounts written off  -     -     -     -   
Total 1,698,761   -     -     1,698,761   Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
76
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC2021 GH¢ Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Individual Individual Individual 
ECL allowance as at 1 January 2021 425,668   -     -    425,668    
New assets originated or purchased 669,284   -     -    669,284    
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs) (425,668)  -     -    (425,668)  
Amounts written off  -     -     -     -   
Total 669,284   -     -    669,284   
18. Non-pledged trading assets   2022 2021 
   GH¢  GH¢ 
    
 Government bonds     366,932   100,071,596    
Treasury bills      13,790,475   43,084,684 
       14,157,407   143,156,280 
18a. Non pledged trading assets 2022 2021 
 FVPL FVPL 
 GH¢   GH¢ 
Balance as at 1 January    143,156,280   67,896,476   
Additions    14,011,407   142,657,354  
Disposals   (143,156,280)  (67,896,476)
Fair value    146,000   498,926  
Balance as at 31 December   14,157,407   143,156,280  
None of the financial instruments was pledged as collateral during the year (2021: Nil).   
19. Equity investments  2022 2021 
  GH¢  GH¢
Advans Ghana (Note 19a)    3,549,552   2,923,386 
YUP Ghana     9,285,350   9,285,350  
Impairment   (9,285,350)  (9,285,350)
Total      3,549,552   2,923,386   
 
19a. Advans Ghana 2022 2021 
 GH¢  GH¢
Balance as at 1 January   2,923,386   2,951,115   
Fair value gain/(loss)   626,166   (27,729) 
  3,549,552   2,923,386  Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
77
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCAdvans Ghana is a Savings and Loans company which 
specializes in the collection of deposits and giving of credits. Societe Generale Ghana has a 6.22% (previously 10%) stake in the ownership of the company. It is an unlisted equity investment which is carried at fair value through profit or loss.    
 Advans Ghana will be held under our  investment 
company SSBI.No consolidation of equity in SSBI
 
The bank has not consolidated SSBI due to the following
 y There is not enough financial information to proceed with the consolidation
 y The balances for consolidation are not deemed as significant
20. Loans and advances 2022 2021 
 GH¢  GH¢
Overdrafts   850,169,886   501,743,477   
Term loans   2,557,363,214   2,115,073,457   
Staff loan   84,015,325   71,006,599   
Equipment finance lease      143,460,214   117,035,204   
Gross loans and advances  (Note 20d)     3,635,008,639   2,804,858,737   
Amortised cost adjustment    (45,950,796)  (28,390,451)
Interest in suspense    (52,331,339)  (37,956,512)
Less:  allowances for impairment  (Note 20e)     (433,733,437)  (234,145,097)
     3,102,993,067   2,504,366,677  
Loans and advances 2022 2021 
 GH¢  GH¢
Current    3,062,523,426   2,497,536,711   
Other loans especially mentioned    82,309,671   94,735,487   
Gross performing loans     3,144,833,097   2,592,272,198   
Substandard    261,260,931   15,406,958   
Doubtful    18,500,896   17,803,061   
Loss   210,413,716   179,376,520   
Gross non performing loans   490,175,542   212,586,539   
Total gross loans   3,635,008,639   2,804,858,737   Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
78
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC 
20a. Other statistics 2022 2021
i. Loan Loss Provision Ratio 11.93% 8.35%
ii. Gross Non-performing Loan Ratio 13.48% 7.58%
iii. 50 Largest Exposure (Gross Funded Loan and Advances to Total Exposure) 67.42% 62.02%
iv.  Liquidity Ratio  88.36% 108.78%
v. Leverage Ratio * 10.16% 12.57%
vi. Off-Balance Sheet Exposures (GH¢ M) 1,893.06   1,079.86   
Leverage ratio* has been computed taken into consideration DDEP reliefs by Bank of Ghana to be applied in the computation of Capital 
Adequacy.
 
 
20b. Analysis by type of customers 2022 2021 
 GH¢  GH¢
Individual    953,613,647   920,323,902   
Private enterprise     1,915,488,705   1,442,944,151   
Public enterprise   439,385,260   137,511,614   
Government departments and agencies     242,505,702   233,072,471   
Staff    84,015,325   71,006,599   
    3,635,008,639   2,804,858,737  
 
 
20c. Analysis by industry sector 2022 2021 
 GH¢  GH¢
Agriculture, forestry and fishing    400,923,206   296,962,528   
Mining and quarrying   72,303,864   60,219,929   
Manufacturing    260,182,234   287,030,719   
Construction    122,476,785   11,591,330   
Electricity, gas and water    402,031,061   201,165,848   
Commerce and finance    186,100,930   160,187,200   
Transport, storage, communication and services     2,068,975,901   1,681,177,356   
Miscellaneous     122,014,658   106,523,827   
     3,635,008,639   2,804,858,737  Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
79
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC20d. Analysis of gross loans and advances
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk based on year-end stage classification. 
The amounts presented are gross of impairment allowances.   
2022  GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Corporate lending 2,007,273,585  134,506,349  360,322,675   2,502,102,609 
Retail lending 973,764,399  8,642,292  150,499,339   1,132,906,030 
Gross loan balance   2,981,037,984  143,148,641  510,822,014      3,635,008,639     
2021  GH¢   Stage 1   Stage 2   Stage 3   Total 
 Collective   Collective   Specific 
 
Corporate lending   1,697,959,024   13,056,542   83,035,000   1,794,050,566   
Retail lending    830,595,666   86,483,505   93,729,000   1,010,808,171   
Gross loan balance     2,528,554,690   99,540,047   176,764,000      2,804,858,737  
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount  in relation to corporate lending is as follows:
2022  GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2022 1,687,065,837   30,925,268   76,059,461   1,794,050,566 
New assets originated or purchased 1,250,009,559   73,854,354   48,905,549   1,372,769,462
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs) (647,246,189)  (8,267,871)  (9,199,882)  (664,713,942)   
Amounts written off  -     -     (3,478)  (3,478)
Total     2,289,829,208   96,511,750   115,761,650   2,502,102,609 
2021  GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021   1,772,289,664   21,162,854   95,749,138   1,889,201,656   
New assets originated or purchased    519,690,552   13,056,542   59,903,353   592,650,447   
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)    (594,021,046)  (21,162,854)  (72,532,800)  (687,716,700)
Amounts written off   (146)  -     (84,691)  (84,837)
Total   1,697,959,024   13,056,542   83,035,000   1,794,050,566   Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
80
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCAn analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to Retail lending is as follows: 
2022 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2022 917,761,808   23,409,766   69,636,597   1,010,808,171 
New assets originated or purchased  382,423,520   67,222,371   73,908,792   523,554,684 
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs) (343,020,588)  (44,186,303)  (14,010,408)  (401,217,299) 
Amounts written off  -     -     (239,526)  (239,526)
Total 957,164,740  46,445,834  129,295,455       1,132,906,030   
2021  GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021    810,431,147   26,798,374   99,338,174   936,567,695  
New assets originated or purchased  445,952,240   82,270,300   31,209,774   559,432,314   
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)    (425,771,817)  (22,582,681)  (33,199,487)  (481,553,985) 
Amounts written off  (15,903)  (2,489)  (3,619,461)  (3,637,853)
Total 830,595,666  86,483,505  93,729,000        1,010,808,171   
20e. Analysis of impairment allowances
2022  GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Corporate lending 51,348,379  89,038,843  157,382,000   297,769,222 
Retail lending 11,650,238  33,046,977  91,267,000   135,964,215 
Gross Loan Balance  62,998,617  122,085,820  248,649,000   433,733,437    
2021 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Corporate lending 42,614,504  2,245,726  78,138,550   122,998,780   
Retail lending 9,669,593  21,677,795  79,798,929   111,146,317   
Gross loan balance  52,284,097  23,923,521 157,937,479   234,145,097  Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
81
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC20f. Analysis of impairment allowances           2022              2021 
            GH¢                GH¢
Opening balance    234,145,097      209,830,240
Loans written off during the year          (235,000)        (2,619,000)
    233,910,097      207,211,240   
Increase in provision    199,823,340        26,933,857  
Closing stock of provision  433,733,437    234,145,097  
Impairment allowance for loans and advances to corporate customers
2022 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2022 42,614,504  2,245,725  78,138,550   122,998,780  
New assets originated or purchased 35,732,953  78,326,011  84,435,953   198,494,917    
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs) (16,828,401) (1,422,074) (5,472,000)  (23,722,475) 
Amounts written off - -  (2,000)  (2,000)  
Total 61,519,056  79,149,663  157,100,503   297,769,222    
2021 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021 46,324,999  3,886,871  77,989,000  128,200,870   
New assets originated or purchased 13,511,954  2,245,725  6,964,000  22,721,680  
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs) (17,222,449) (3,886,871) (6,729,450) (27,838,770)
Amounts written off -  -  (85,000) (85,000)
Total 42,614,504  2,245,725  78,138,550  122,998,780   
Impairment allowance for loans and advances to retail customers
2022 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2022    9,669,593   21,677,795   79,798,929   111,146,317   
New assets originated or purchased    5,875,240   31,765,196   19,755,000   57,395,436   
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)   (6,031,991)  (20,482,163)  (5,829,384)  (32,343,539)
Amounts written off  -     -     (234,000)  (234,000)
Total 9,512,842  32,960,828  93,490,545   135,964,215   Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
82
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC   
2021 GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021    9,079,967   6,629,403   65,920,000   81,629,370   
New assets originated or purchased  4,985,972   20,489,005   23,831,929   49,306,906   
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)   (4,396,346)  (5,440,613)  (7,419,000)  (17,255,959)   
Amounts written off  -     -       (2,534,000)  (2,534,000)
Total 9,669,593  21,677,795  79,798,929  111,146,317  
Loan provisioning/impairment are carried out in accordance with Bank of Ghana Policy as well as the principles of IFRS. Loan impairment 
losses calculated based on IFRS principles are passed through the statement of comprehensive income. Where credit loss provisions per IFRS principles is more than provisions per  Bank of Ghana guidelines, no regulatory credit reserve is required.
When the credit loss provision calculated under IFRS principles is less than what is required under the Bank of Ghana guidelines, transfers 
are made from the income surplus account into the non- distributable regulatory credit reserves. 
   2022 2021 
   GH¢  GH¢
Provisions per Bank of Ghana Guidelines    275,083,236   185,168,207 
Provisions per IFRS   433,733,437   234,145,097    
No credit risk reserve was made in 2022 and 2021 as IFRS provision is greater than provision under Bank of Ghana guidelines.
21. Investment securities                     2022                 2021
 GH¢  GH¢    
Debt instruments measured at amortised cost                                 Bills      736,508,571   730,758,421     
Debt instruments measured at amortised cost                                 Bonds 60,047,812   653,196,584
Debt instruments measured at Fair value through OCI                  Bonds   43,784,934   87,240,744      
    840,341,317   1,471,195,749   
 Debt instruments 
measured at 
amortised cost2022 2021
21a.      Debt instruments 
measured at Fair value 
through OCIDebt instruments 
measured at 
amortised costDebt instruments 
measured at Fair value 
through OCI 
 GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢ 
Cost    822,434,402   86,288,305   1,384,667,134   86,148,963     
Fair value  -  583,901  -  1,091,781  
Less impairment  (25,878,019)  (43,087,272)  (712,130)  -   
   796,556,383   43,784,934   1,383,955,004   87,240,744 
These instruments form part of the bonds exchanged under the Government of Ghana’s Domestic Debt Exchange Programme. Hence the 
significant increase in impairment in 2022.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
83
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCDebt instruments measured at amortised cost
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk and year-end stage classification. The amounts 
presented is net of impairment allowances.
 2022  GH¢
 Stage 1       Stage 2                        Stage 3                            Total 
                                                                                  Collective Collective Specific  
Government Bills and Bonds               736,508,571   -     60,047,812   796,556,383    
Total exposure                                       736,508,571   -     60,047,812  796,556,383    
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount and year-end stage classification is, as follows:
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2022 1,384,667,134   -     -     1,384,667,134 
New assets originated or purchased 707,956,440   -     83,060,079    791,016,519 
Assets derecognised or matured (excluding write offs) (1,353,249,251)  -     -     (1,353,249,251)
Amounts written off  -     -     -     -   
Total  739,374,323   -     83,060,079   822,434,402  
21b. Impairment allowance for Debt Instruments at Amortized Cost           2022       2021
              GH¢        GH¢ 
Opening balance                                                712,130                              503,932 
Charge for the year                                           25,165,889                             208,198 
Closing stock of provision                                           25,878,019                             712,130  
2022  GH¢  Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
ECL allowance as at 1 January 2022 712,130   -     -     712,130      
New assets originated or purchased  -     -    25,369,363   25,369,363   
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs) (203,474)  -     -     (203,474)    
Amounts written off  -     -     -     -   
Total 508,656   -     25,369,362.74   25,878,019   Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
84
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC2021  GH¢    
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Individual Individual Individual
 
Government bills and bonds 1,383,955,004   -     -    1,383,955,004   
Total exposure 1,383,955,004   -     -    1,383,955,004  Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount and year-end stage classification is, as follows:
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
 Individual Individual Collective 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021 428,091,754   -     -    428,091,754  
New assets originated or purchased 1,057,882,493   -     -    1,057,882,493   
Assets derecognised or matured (excluding write offs) (101,307,113)  -     -    (101,307,113)
Amounts written off  -     -     -    - 
Total   1,384,667,134   -     -     1,384,667,134  
Impairment allowance for debt instruments measured at amortised cost
2021  GH¢
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Individual Individual Individual 
ECL allowance as at 1 January 2021  503,932   -     -     503,932    
New assets originated or purchased   327,453   -     -     327,453 
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)  (119,255)  -     -     (119,255)     
Amounts written off  -     -     -     -   
Total 712,130   -     -     712,130  
22. Property, plant and equipment  
   2022 2021 
    GH¢  GH¢
Property, plant and equipment (22b)      292,785,473   255,268,418   
     292,785,473   255,268,418   Debt instruments measured at amortised cost
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk and year-end stage classification. The amounts 
presented is net of impairment allowances.
85
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC Land &  
 Building 
 Land &  
 Building 2022   GH¢
2021  GH¢ Right  
of  Use  
 Assets  
 Right  
of  Use  
 Assets   Computers
 Computers Furniture & 
 Equipment 
 Furniture & 
 Equipment   Motor 
 Vehicles 
  Motor 
 Vehicles    Assets in  
 Course of 
 Construction 
   Assets in  
 Course of 
 Construction    Total
   TotalNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
   
22a. Depreciation and amortization    2022 2021 
   GH¢   GH¢
Property, plant and equipment (Note 22b)      32,747,078   30,463,364   
Intangible assets (Note 23)      6,686,857   4,344,234   
      39,433,935   34,807,598  
22b. Property, Plant and Equipment
Cost/valuation  GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Balance as at 1 January    83,326,887   222,308,505   26,338,617   62,807,004   8,898,052   10,538,126   414,217,191  
Additions  7,689   12,932,955   4,461,212   3,159,860   1,002,310   48,909,573   70,473,599  
Transfers  944,982   325,448   5,161,330   347,994   -     (6,779,754) -
Reclassification        (209,466)  (209,466)
Balance as at 31 December    84,279,558   235,566,908   35,961,159   66,314,858   9,900,362   52,458,479   484,481,324   
Depreciation
Balance as at 1 January   34,704,529   48,963,915   22,498,302   44,268,742   8,513,284   -     158,948,773   
Charge for the year     4,639,102   18,590,236   2,638,559   6,463,667   415,514   -     32,747,078   
Balance as at 31 December  39,343,631   67,554,151   25,136,862   50,732,409   8,928,798   -     191,695,851 
NBV as at 31 December 2022  44,935,927   168,012,757   10,824,298   15,582,448   971,564   52,458,479   292,785,473 
Cost/valuation  GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Balance at 1 January  81,063,823   217,114,235   22,816,602   52,092,312   8,975,095   37,248,483   419,310,550   
Additions    117,254   3,277,747   2,185,520   1,288,335   -     3,108,041   9,976,898   
Transfers    2,145,810   1,916,523   1,336,494   9,426,358   -     (14,825,184)  -   
Reclassification  -     -     -     -     -     (14,993,214)  (14,993,214)
Write offs   -     -     -     -     (77,043)  -     (77,043)
Balance as at 31 December   83,326,887   222,308,505   26,338,617   62,807,004   8,898,052   10,538,126   414,217,191   
86
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
 Land &  
 Building 2021  Right  
of  Use  
 Assets   Computers  Furniture & 
 Equipment   Motor 
 Vehicles    Assets in  
 Course of 
 Construction    Total
Depreciation  GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢ GH¢
Balance at 1 January     28,280,704   32,786,662   21,102,781   38,629,549   7,762,755   -     128,562,451  
Charge for the year   6,423,825   16,177,253   1,395,521   5,639,193   827,572   -     30,463,364  
Transfers   -  -  -     -     -     -  -   
Disposal  -     -     -     -     (77,043)  -     (77,043)   
Balance as at 31 December  34,704,529   48,963,915   22,498,302   44,268,742   8,513,284   -     158,948,773  
NBV as at 31 December 2021  48,622,358   173,344,590   3,840,314   18,538,262   384,768   10,538,126   255,268,418  
23. Intangible assets
 2022 2021 
  GH¢  GH¢
Computer softwareCostBalance as at 1 January   39,956,054   21,866,496   
Additions  2,073,674   3,096,343  
Reclassification (Note 22b)  102,984   14,993,214 
Balance as at 31 December    42,132,712   39,956,054   
AmortisationBalance as at 1 January   24,946,260   20,602,025  
Charge for the year    6,686,857   4,344,234   
Balance as at 31 December   31,633,117   24,946,260  
Balance as at 31 December    10,499,595   15,009,794  
The amortization periods and key factors considered in determining the useful life are the same as disclosed in note 2.8 
above.
24. Corporate Tax: assets/(liabilities) 
 2022 2021 
 GH¢   GH¢ 
Corporate tax (note 24a)     (62,309,201)  (22,731,274)
National stabilization levy (Note 24b)      3,377,522   1,559,711  
Financial sector recovery levy (Note 24c)      1,664,191   (153,621)
     (57,267,488)  (21,325,184)
87
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
24a. Corporate tax: assets/(liabilities)
 2022 2021 
  GH¢  GH¢
Balance as at 1 January     (22,731,274)  (24,680,582) 
Charge to statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income      (105,427,376)  (83,513,629)
Payment during the year    65,849,449   85,462,937    
Balance as at 31 December      (62,309,201)  (22,731,274)
24b. National stabilization levy: assets/(liabilities) 
 2022 2021 
 GH¢  GH¢
Balance as at 1 January     1,559,711   (1,071,942) 
Charge to statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income     (8,419,216)  (14,098,333)
Payment during the year      10,237,027   16,729,986   
Balance as at 31 December      3,377,522   1,559,711  
The levy charged on the profit is based on a rate of 5% .
In accordance with the National Fiscal Stabilization Act, 2013, (Act 862) all companies in Banking, Non Bank Financial Institutions, 
Insurance, Mining, Brewery and Communication are supposed to pay a levy of 5% of profit before tax towards National Fiscal Stability.
The levy charged on the profit is based on a rate of 5%.
The Financial Sector Recovery Levy was institituted as a levy on banks to raise revenue to support the financial sector reforms and to provide 
for related matters. Thus , In accordance with the Financial Sector Recovery Levy Act, 2021 (Act 1067), all Banking Instituitions (excluding rural banks and community banks) are required  to pay 5% of profit before tax as a Levy. The Act was gazetted on 31 March 2021.
25. Other assets 2022 2021 
  GH¢  GH¢
Stationery and consumable stocks   246,523   49,626   
Prepayments and sundry debtors (Note 25a)      101,556,049   53,995,388   
Accrued income   194,961   85,173 
       101,997,533   54,130,187   
24c. Financial sector recovery levy: assets/(liabilities) 
 2022 2021 
 GH¢  GH¢
Balance as at 1 January (153,621)  -   
Charge to statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income (8,419,216)  (11,554,021)
Payment during the year 10,237,028   11,400,402    
Balance as at 31 December        1,664,191   (153,621)
88
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
25a.     Prepayments and sundry debtors
  GH¢  GH¢
Finance lease prepayment   2,929,903   3,094,407   
Unpaid customer charges      11,423,378   8,899,518   
Deferred staff cost    27,768,136   13,110,105   
Rent prepayment   -     285,788  
Medical prepayment    3,562,136   3,134,072   
Other sundry debtors and prepayment*       55,872,496   25,471,498  
       101,556,049   53,995,388  
 *Included in sundry debtors is an amount of 12,870,294.21 due from YUP Ghana (A company for which SG Ghana holds 35.6% interest). At year end, management 
has determined that there is objective evidence that the receivable is impaired. Thus, SG Ghana has calculated an additional amount of impairment of loss of 8,367,564 (4,502,730 in 2021) as the difference between the carrying amount and the recoverable value and has recognised the loss within in the statement of profit or loss.
26. Derivative assets/(liabilities)  held for risk management  2022 2021 
  GH¢  GH¢
Fx swap    188,780,000   (40,509,648) 
    188,780,000   (40,509,648) 
Derivative Financial Instruments
The table below shows the fair values of derivative financial instruments recorded as assets or liabilities together with their 
notional amounts. The notional amount, recorded gross, is the amount of a derivative’s underlying asset, reference rate or index and is the basis upon which changes in the value of derivatives are measured. The notional amounts indicate the volume of transactions outstanding at the year end and are indicative of neither the market risk nor the credit risk.
Fair value of 
derivatives
held for
tradingDerivative
assets 
held for risk 
management
Fair value of 
derivatives
held for
tradingDerivative
liabilities 
held for risk 
management
2022 2021 Notional 
amountNotional 
amount
  GH¢   GH¢ 
   
Foreign Exchange SWAP  40,509,648   575,730,000      GH¢   GH¢ 
   
Foreign Exchange SWAP   188,780,000   600,290,000    
Most of the Bank’s derivative trading activities relate to deals with customers that are normally offset by transactions with 
other counterparties. The Bank may also take positions with the expectation of profiting from favourable movements in prices, rates or indices.The derivatives of the bank are fair valued at level 2 using the discounted cash flow method. Future cash flows are estimated based on forward exchange rates (from observable forward exchange rate at the end of the reporting period) and contract forward rates, discounted at a rate that reflects the credit risk of various counterparties.  The valuation approach used in valuing the FX derivative is the mark- to- market approach.
89
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
27. Borrowings  2022  2021 
  GH¢  GH¢
Socgen borrowing    477,986,926   422,616,338   
European international bank    14,348,602   16,748,123   
Proparco    13,795,418   17,163,281   
International Finance Corporation    136,455,015   132,336,886    
    642,585,961   588,864,628  
Socgen
BorrowingEuropean
International 
BankPropaco International
 Finance 
Corporation  Total
        GH¢                                  GH¢                                GH¢                                 GH¢    GH¢ 
Opening Balance                    422,616,338              16,748,123        17,163,281            132,336,886          588,864,628 
Movements within the year:
Cash movements                       51,253,000             (2,366,375)       (3,351,700)  2,616,563           48,151,488  
Non cash movements                        4,117,588                   (33,146)             (16,163)  1,501,566             5,569,845 
Closing balance                   477,986,926           14,348,602      13,795,418           136,455,015      642,585,961 
The Bank has not had any defaults of principal, interest or other breaches with regard to any liabilities during 2022 or 2021.                  
Societe de Promotion et de Participation pour la 
Cooperation Economique (PROPARCO):   This is a USD 30 million long-term credit line (‘the facility’) granted to the bank. The first draw down of USD 6 million has a fixed interest rate of 5.12% and  matured on 30 April 2020. The second draw down of USD 4 million has a fixed interest rate of 5.19% and  matured on 30 April 2020. The third draw down was EUR7.5 million.  The related interest rate is 6-months Libor plus a margin of 370 basis points and will mature on 30  April  2024.  As at 31 December  2022  the amount outstanding is € 1.5 million.
European Investment Bank (EIB): This is a €  20 million 
credit facility extended to the bank by EIB. The loan could be drawn in EUR and/or USD and to be used to finance up to 50% of the banks capital expenditure intended to develop the bank’s intermediation capacities (such as developing its branch network, IT Systems, training etc.) and for financing eligible Private Sector Small and Medium Sized Enterprises. The interest rate on the drawn portion is fixed at 5.422% and matures on 1 April 2024.  As at  31 December  2022 the outstanding balance is  US$ 1.65 million.SocGen Borrowing: The bank took two facilitities from 
the group.  The first one  is a  US$ 65.8 million renewabIe 1 year credit line. The second  is a 7 year loan facility  of US$55M  at Libor 3-months  plus a margin of 376 basis points and will mature in 4th May  2027.  As at 31 December 2022  the total  amount outstanding on both facilities  was  US$ 55 million.
International Finance Corporation (IFC): This is a 7 
year $50M facility granted to support funding in the SME business space. The first draw down  of  US$25M was done on 24 June 2021 at a rate of 3 month Libor plus a spread of 270 basis point. As at 31 December 2022, total amount outstanding is   US$15.625 million.2022
90
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
28. Deposit from customers
  2022  2021
  GH¢  GH¢
Retail customers    
   
        Term Deposits  480,002,273   441,267,773 
        Current Deposits  1,018,117,684   839,164,957 
        Savings Deposits  585,890,513   567,775,555 
Corporate customers         Term Deposits 109,348,781   119,142,367 
        Current Deposits  2,043,922,113   1,422,000,000 
        Savings Deposits 2,286,836   1,790,031 
Deposits from customers      4,239,568,200   3,391,140,683    
Deposits from banks     1,145,398   1,916,501     
     4,240,713,598     3,393,057,184   
28a. Analysis by type of deposits  2022  2021 
 GH¢  GH¢
Financial institutions    35,042,226   16,357,750   
Individuals and other private enterprise     4,028,489,567   3,340,670,661   
Government departments and agencies    2,975,316   3,189,699   
Public enterprises     174,206,489    32,839,074  
      4,240,713,598    3,393,057,184  
20 Largest depositors to total deposit ratio 27.90% 23.38%
29. Other liabilities
  2022  2021
  GH¢  GH¢
Creditors     136,587,615   44,593,838   
Other creditors and provisions (Note 29a)    360,212,936   190,609,988   
Accruals (Note 29b)     69,830,680   129,496,312   
    566,631,231   364,700,138 
91
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
29a. Other creditors and provisions
  2022  2021
  GH¢  GH¢
Payment orders    4,986,087   6,886,660   
Statutory deductions    4,159,597   3,488,010   
Uncleared effects (Note 29c)     283,502,347   124,298,103   
Other commitments & credit balances    44,774,819   14,162,296   
Staff related provisions  (Note 29d)    2,600,000   2,600,000     
Provisions on contingencies    8,740,067   1,540,029   
Bills payment   3,778,186   16,144,722  
Other provisions (Note 29d)  7,671,833   21,490,169 
     360,212,936   190,609,989  
29b. Accruals
  2022  2021
  GH¢  GH¢
Staff  &  related  accruals      8,968,323   7,694,177    
Audit fees    815,511   751,980   
Software maintenance     7,619,099   24,354,864   
 IT , marketing  &  other shared services     37,701,930   86,019,571   
Other  accruals    14,725,817   10,675,720 
   69,830,680   129,496,312  
29c. Uncleared effects 
This comprises uncleared balances on customer cheques and balances on customer transit accounts pending onward 
transfers.    
Aging analysis of uncleared effects        
  Below 3  3 to 6   6 to 12  Above 1
 Total months  months   months  year
 Uncleared effects     283,502,346   259,483,443   934,271   2,166,809   20,917,823    
  
  Below 3  3 to 6   6 to 12  Above 1
 Total months  months   months  year
Uncleared effects    124,298,103   89,752,751   17,480,237   6,537,951   10,527,164   2022
GH¢ 
2021
GH¢ 
92
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
29d. Provisions      
2022 Other Provisions   Staff  Provisions   Total
 GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
As at 1 January 2022   21,490,169   2,600,000   24,090,169   
Provisions made during the year    691,909   -     691,909  
Provisions reversed during the year   (14,510,245)  -     (14,510,245)
As at 31  December  2022   7,671,833   2,600,000   10,271,833   
2021
As at 1 January 2021  4,765,007   2,537,000   7,302,007  
Provisions made during the year  16,982,413   63,000   17,045,413   
Provisions reversed during the year   (257,251)  -     (257,251)
As at 31 December 2021  21,490,169   2,600,000   24,090,169  
Staff  Provisions: This relates to provisions made for staff reorganization and/or termination .  The provisions made reflect Management’s 
best estimate of the expected outflow in the coming year.
Other Provisions: This relates to provisions for legal cases, registrar services and other incidental business costs.Provision for legal cases 
is the best estimate of claims from legal actions brought against the Bank. A fair assessement by the Bank indicates probable judgement against the Bank. Provision for registrar services and incidental business cost relates to  business expenses for which timing and outflow is uncertain.
30. Stated capital
  2022   2021 
a. Authorised ordinary shares
Number of ordinary shares of no par value 1,000,000,000   1,000,000,000
   
b. Issued and fully paid ordinary shares  Number   Amount   Number   Amount
    GH¢  GH¢
Issued and fully paid ordinary shares  709,141,367     404,245,427     709,141,367     404,245,427 
31. Dividend declared and paid
  2022  2021 
 GH¢  GH¢
Equity dividend on ordinary shares:Dividend declared                                                                              48,386,529   80,842,116   
Dividend paid during the year   (48,386,529)  (80,842,116)
Balance as at 31 December  -     -   
Dividends are treated as appropriation of profit in the year of approval by shareholders.2022 2021
93
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
During the year the following transactions were performed with related parties:
a. Interest paid and interest received from related parties during the year
 
 Interest Paid  Interest    Interest Paid  Interest 
   Received   Received
  GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Societe Generale borrowing   28,192,978   1,216,460   12,528,079   97,847 
b. Related party balances at December
Lending to related parties: 
 2022  2021 
  GH¢  GH¢
Officers and employees other than Directors  84,015,325   71,006,599   
Nostro account balances with Societe Generale Group   183,491,099   89,041,751   
c. Loans to Directors 
There were no loans to directors during the period. 
d. Controlling relationship 
Societe Generale Group is related by virtue of its ultimate (100%) controlling interest in SG Financial Services Holding, 
which has significant controlling interest in the shareholding in Societe Generale Ghana PLC. 
33. Commitments and Contingent Liabilities
33a. Breakdown of Commitments and Contingent Liabilities 
 2022 2021
 GH¢  GH¢
Guarantees and indemnities   561,567,495   24,384,146   
Letters of credit & others   234,237,714   178,601,059   
Other undrawn commitments  33,121,290   58,162,811   
Spot and forward purchase   1,064,129,442   818,711,895   
    1,893,055,941   1,079,859,911   2022 202132. Related Party Transactions / Disclosures
A number of banking transactions were entered into 
with related parties in the normal course of business. These include loans and placements. Loans to related parties is done at arm’s length and approved by the highest approving authority as spelt out in the Banks and Specialized Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930). 
a) The person to whom the credit facility is given has credit 
worthiness which is not less than that normally required by the Bank or other persons to whom credit facilities are given.b) A collateral provided will be evaluated on the same terms and procedures normally required by the Bank for any other person to whom a credit facility is givenc) The terms and conditions of the credit facility are not less favourable to the Bank than those normally offered to other persons and d) The granting of the credit facility is in the interest of the bank.
The credit facility shall be approved by the Board of 
Directors.
94
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCTo meet the financial needs of customers, the Bank 
enters into various irrevocable commitments and contingent  liabilities. These consist of financial guarantees, letters of credit and other commitments to lend. Even though these obligations may not be recognised on the statement of financial position, they contain credit risk and, therefore, form part of the overall risk of the Bank. Letters of credit and guarantees (including standby letters of credit) commit the Bank to make payments on behalf of customers in the event of a specific act, generally related to the import or export of goods. Guarantees and standby letters of credit carry a similar credit risk to loans. The nominal values of such commitments are listed below.
Impairment losses on guarantees and other 
commitmentsAn analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount and the corresponding allowance for impairment losses in relation to guarantees and other commitments is, as follows:
Financial guarantees
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure and year-end stage classification.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
2022 GH¢ Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Financial guarantees 1,893,055,941   -     -         1,893,055,941 
Total outstanding exposure 1,893,055,941   -     -       1,893,055,941   
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount  in relation to contingent liabilities is as follows:
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2022 1,079,859,911   -     -     1,079,859,911  
New assets originated or purchased 1,893,055,941   -    -  1,893,055,941  
Assets derecognised or matured (excluding write offs)              (1,079,859,911)  -     -     (1,079,859,911)  
Amounts written off - -  -     -   
Total outstanding exposure 1,893,055,941   -     -        1,893,055,941  
2021 GH¢ Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Financial guarantees 1,079,859,911    -     -         1,079,859,911  
Total outstanding exposure 1,079,859,911    -     -       1,079,859,911   
 
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total 
 Collective Collective Specific 
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021 665,671,285    -     -     665,671,285 
New assets originated or purchased 1,079,859,911    -    - 1,079,859,911 
Assets derecognised or matured (excluding write offs) (665,671,285)  -    -  (665,671,285) 
Amounts written off - -  -     -   
Total outstanding exposure 1,079,859,911    -     -       1,079,859,911 
95
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC34. Legal liability 
Litigation is a common occurrence in the Banking 
industry due to the nature of the business undertaken. The Bank has formal controls and policies for managing legal claims. Once professional advice has been obtained and the amount of loss reasonably estimated, the Bank makes adjustments to account for any adverse effects which the claims may have on its financial standing. As at December 2022, the Bank had several unresolved legal claims.
Adequate provision has been made for all the relevant 
litigation for which losses may be probable. The probable outflow which could result from all such litigation, based on the current status of the various legal proceedings, is estimated to be no more than GH¢ 4,588,869 while the timing of the outflow is uncertain.As at the end of the 2022 financial year, the case CBAM versus SGGH was pending in court. The amount and timing of possible outflow however remains uncertain. The total amount in dispute for this case is USD 10M and is therefore disclosed as a contingent liability. 
35. Analysis of financial assets and liabilities
Financial assets and liabilities as well as equity 
investments are measured on an on-going basis either at fair value or at amortized cost. The principal  accounting policies  in Notes 2 describe how the classes of financial instruments are measured and how income and expenses, including fair value gains and losses, are recognized. The following table analyses the financial assets and liabilities in the statement of financial position by class of financial instrument to which they are assigned, and therefore by the measurement basis: 
 
 
 GH¢  GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Cash and cash equivalents   -     1,950,873,066   -     -     1,950,873,066    
Non-pledged trading assets     14,157,407   - -  -      14,157,407    
Investment securities -  -   43,784,934   796,556,383   840,341,317    
Loans and advances to customers -       3,102,993,067   - -   3,102,993,067     
Equity Investments    3,549,552  - -  -     3,549,552    
Total financial assets    17,706,959   5,053,866,133   43,784,934   796,556,383   5,911,914,409  
Total non-financial assets -  - - -     683,921,694       
Total assets          6,595,836,103    Financial 
Assets at FVPL31 December 2022Loan and 
Advances at 
amortised 
costDebt
 Instrument 
Designated at 
FVOCIDebt 
Instrument 
at amortised 
costTotal Carrying 
Amount Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Financial Assets  
33b. Impairment allowance for contingent liabilities 2022 2021 
 GH¢  GH¢ 
Opening balance  1,540,029   3,827,276   
Charge for the year   7,200,038   (2,287,247)
Closing stock of provision    8,740,067   1,540,029   
 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3  Total
 Collective Collective Specific
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2022    1,540,029   -     -     1,540,029  
New assets originated or purchased  7,200,038   -    -  7,200,038 
Assets derecognised or matured (excluding write offs)    -     -    -  -   
Amounts written off -  -     -     -
As at 31 December 2022   8,740,067   -     -     8,740,067  
96
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
 
  Deposits from banks and customers                                                                                        -             4,240,713,598        4,240,713,598     
 Borrowings                                                                                                                                          -                 642,585,961         642,585,961      
 Total financial liabilities                                                                                                          -          4,883,299,559           4,883,299,559         
 Total non-financial liabilities         1,712,536,544       
 Total liabilities and shareholders fund       6,595,836,103         
  Financial 
Liabilities at
amortised cost
GH¢ Financial 
Liabilities 
at FVPL
 
 GH¢ 
Financial 
Liabilities 
at FVPL
 
 GH¢ Financial liabilitiesTotal 
Carrying 
Amount
 GH¢ 
 GH¢  GH¢  GH¢  GH¢  GH¢
Cash & cash equivalents  -     963,960,922   -     -     963,960,922   
Non-pledged trading assets   143,156,280     -     143,156,280   
Investment securities  -     -      87,240,744   1,383,955,004   1,471,195,749   
Loans and advances to customers  -       2,504,366,677    -     -       2,504,366,677   
Equity Investments    2,923,386    -     -     -       2,923,386      
Total financial assets    146,079,666   3,468,327,600   87,240,744   1,383,955,004   5,085,603,015    
Total non-financial assets       351,419,105    
Total assets        5,437,022,119  Financial 
Assets at FVPL31 December 2021
31 December 202131 December 2022
 Financial 
Assets at 
amortised 
cost Debt 
Instrument 
Designated at 
FVOCIDebt 
Instrument 
at amortised 
costTotal
 Carrying 
Amount 
Financial Assets
Deposits from banks and customers                                                                                -  3,393,057,184      3,485,289,259  
Borrowings  588,864,628     588,864,628  
Total financial liabilities    -          3,981,921,812             3,981,921,812    
Total non-financial liabilities   1,455,100,307   
Total liabilities and shareholders fund   5,437,022,119   Financial 
 Liabilities 
 Measured at  
 Amortised Cost 
 GH¢ Financial liabilitiesTotal 
Carrying 
Amount
 GH¢ 
97
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNote
GH¢ GH¢ GH¢ GH¢31 December 2022
31  December  2021Level 1
GH¢Level 2
GH¢Level 3
GH¢Total
GH¢
 
Assets                       
Non-Pledged Trading assets  18  -      14,157,407    -      14,157,407   
Derivative financial asset  26   -        188,780,000         -         188,780,000  
Equity investment  19     -       3,549,552    -      3,549,552   
Total Assets   -      206,486,959    -      206,486,959   
 Note Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Assets                      
Non-Pledged Trading assets  18  -     143,156,280   -     143,156,280     
Equity investment  19     -      2,923,386   -     2,923,386     
Total Assets   -     146,079,666   -     146,079,666  
Liabilities                       
Derivative Financial Liabilities 26  -     40,509,648   -     40,509,648       
Total Liabilities   -     40,509,648   -     40,509,648 
There were no transfers between levels 1 and 2 within the period.Notes to the Financial Statements cont’d
36. Determination of fair value and fair values hierarchy
The Bank uses the following hierarchy for determining and disclosing the fair value of financial instruments by the valuation technique:
 y Level 1: Quoted (unadjusted) prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
 y Level 2: Other techniques for which all inputs have a significant effect on the recorded fair value. 
 y Level 3: Techniques for which inputs have a significant  effect on the recorded fair value that are not based on observable market data. 
Financial assets and liabilities measured using a valuation technique based on assumptions that are supported by prices from observable current market transactions are assets and liabilities for which pricing is obtained via pricing services, but where prices have not been determined in an active market, financial assets with fair values based on broker codes, investment in private equity funds with fair values obtained via fund Managers and assets that are valued using the Bank’s own models whereby the majority of assumptions are market observable.
Non-market observable inputs means that fair values 
are determined in whole, or in parts, using a valuation technique, based on assumptions that are neither supported by prices from observable current market transactions in the same instrument, nor are they based on available market data. The main asset classes in this category are unlisted equity investments and debt instruments. Valuation techniques are used to the extent that observable inputs are not available, thereby allowing for situations in which there is little, if any, market activity for the asset or liability at the measurement date. Therefore,  observable inputs reflect the Bank’s own assumption  about the assumptions that market participants will use in pricing the asset or liability (including assumptions about risk). These inputs are developed based on the best information available which might include the Bank’s own data. Valuation was conducted by KOA Consult and Value Properties.
The following shows  an analysis of financial instruments recorded at fair value by level of the fair value hierarchy done on a recurring basis.
98
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Level 2 valuation technique
The assets in Level 2 comprise mainly Government of Ghana securities (Treasury Bills). They are valued using published results of tender for Government of Ghana and Bank of Ghana bill, notes and bonds at the financial year end.
Level 3 valuation technique
The assets in Level 3 comprise revaluation gain on the Bank’s fixed assets. Fair value of the properties was determined using the market comparable method. The valuations have been performed by the valuer and are based on proprietary databases of prices of transactions for properties of similar nature, location and condition. 
37. Financial risk managementRisk   is   inherent   in   the   Bank’s   activities   but is managed through a process of ongoing identification, measurement and monitoring, subject to risk limits and other controls. This process of risk management is critical to the Bank’s continuing profitability and each individual within the Bank is accountable for the risk exposures relating to his or her responsibilities.
The Bank is exposed to credit risk, liquidity risk, interest 
rate risk and market risk. It is also subject to various operating risks.
The independent risk control process does not include 
business risks such as changes in the environment, technology and industry. The Bank’s policy is to monitor those business risks through the Bank’s strategic planning process. 
Risk management structure
The  Board  of  Directors  is  ultimately  responsible for identifying and controlling risks. However, there are separate independent bodies responsible for managing and monitoring risks.
Board of Directors
The Board of Directors is responsible for the overall risk management approach and for approving the risk management strategies and principles.
Risk committeesThe Risk Committees have the overall responsibility for  the  development   of  the  risk  strategy   and implementing  principles, frameworks, policies and limits. The  Risk  Committees  are  responsible  for managing risk decisions and monitoring risk levels. The main Risk Committees  and its frequency  of meetings are:
i. Credit Risk Committee - Quarterly;
ii. Asset and Liabilities Committee - Bi-monthly;
iii. Market Risk Committee - Quarterly;
iv. Operational Risk Committee (Periodic and 
Permanent Control, Business Continuity Planning and Compliance) - Quarterly.
Risk managementRisk Management is done under specialists units of Credit and Market Risk Department and Operational and Permanent Control Division. These Units are responsible for implementing and maintaining risk related procedures to ensure independent control process is maintained. Societe Generale Ghana Risk is managed through a process of ongoing identification, measurement and monitoring, subject to risk limits and other controls.
This process of risk management is critical to the Bank’s 
continuing profitability and each individual within the Bank is accountable for the risk exposures relating to his or her responsibilities. The Bank is exposed to credit risk, liquidity and interest rate risk and market risk. It is also subject to various operating risks. The independent risk control process does not include business risks such as changes in the environment, technology and industry.
The Bank’s policy is to monitor those business risks 
through the Bank’s strategic planning process.
Risk control
Risk Control is done under the various specialist units of Risk Management where monitoring of compliance with risk principles, policies and limits across the Bank is undertaken. Each business group has its own unit which is responsible for the independent control risks, including monitoring the risk of exposures against limits and the assessment of risks of new products and structured transactions. These units also ensure  the complete capture of the risk in risk measurement and reporting systems through the various committees to the Board.
99
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Bank treasury
The Bank’s Treasury is responsible for managing the Bank’s assets and liabilities and the overall financial structure. It is also primarily responsible for the funding and liquidity risks management of the Bank.
Internal control systems
The bank has in place internal control systems and mechanisms aimed at ensuring that legal and regulatory provisions, ethics, and professional practices are complied with, internal processes of the bank are functioning properly and the financial information are reliable. The system is particularly designed to identify malfunctions and irregularities, to efficiently control risks, and to make sure that information systems are reliable. Internal control system distinguishes two levels of control: Permanent Control which forms the first level of control and Periodic Controls as a second level of control.
Permanent Control is essential for the bank’s internal control 
structure and is defined as all procedures  implemented on a permanent basis to guarantee that operations carried out on an operational level are correctly handled, secure and valid. It is based on day-to-day security, which is everyone’s responsibility and on formal supervision carried out by management. 
Periodic control activities are performed by dedicated and 
specialized teams of auditors which are independent from the operational entities. The scope of Periodic Controls encompasses all the bank’s activities and can focus on any aspect of these activities, without any restrictions. 
Internal Audit
The Bank’s policy is that risk management processes throughout the Bank are audited annually by  the  internal  audit  function,  which  examines both  the  adequacy  of  the  procedures  and  the Bank’s compliance with the procedures. Internal Audit  discusses  the  results  of  all  assessments with management,  and reports its  findings and recommendations to the Audit Committee.
The most significant risks which the bank is exposed to and 
how they are managed are as below:
Credit risk
Credit risk is the risk that the Bank will incur a loss because its customers or counterparties fail to discharge their contractual obligations.
The Bank manages and controls credit risk by setting 
limits on the amount of risk it is willing to accept for individual  counterparties  and for geographical and industry concentrations, and by monitoring exposures in relation to such limits.The Bank also manages its counter party risk through adherence to Bank of Ghana prudential requirements by ensuring that it’s secured lending to any single borrower is below 25% of its net worth and that any single unsecured lending by the bank is less than 10% of the bank’s net worth.
The framework for managing this risk is the credit policy which 
spells out the overall underwriting standards, credit approval process, credit administration and recovery processes. The policy is reviewed from time to time (at least yearly) in response to risk profile of new business opportunities/products  and  any  challenges  with  the  recovery process.
The Bank has established a credit quality review process 
through the Credit Committee to provide early  identification of  possible  changes in  the creditworthiness  of  counterparties,  including regular collateral revisions. Counterparty limits are established by the use of a credit risk classification system, which assigns major counterparty a risk rating.
Risk ratings are subject to regular revision.
The  credit  quality  review  process  aims  to  allow the Bank to assess the potential loss as a result of the risks to which it is exposed and take corrective action.
The Bank’s credit quality review process is established   in  
line  with   the  Societe   Generale Group’s risk management governance based on the following;
 y A strong managerial involvement throughout the entire organization: From the Board of Directors through to the Credit Committee and to the operational field management teams.
 y A  tight framework  of internal procedures  and guidelines.
 y A well defined permanent supervision  process that assists to identify through a self examination the need for review of certain processes to improve on the Bank’s credit delivery and collection processes.
 y Independence  of Risk assessment department from the business divisions;
 y A consistent approach to risk assessment and monitoring applied throughout the Group.
The bank in estimating and establishing its potential credit losses, counterparty limits are established by the use of a credit risk classification system, which assigns major counterparties a risk rating. Risk ratings are subject to regular revision.
The  credit  quality  review  process  aims  to  allow the bank 
to assess the potential loss as a result of the risks to which it is exposed and take corrective action.
100
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Maximum credit exposure
  2022  2021  
  GH¢  GH¢
Due from bank and other financial institution    584,228,294   283,381,957    
Non-pledged trading assets     14,157,407   143,156,280    
Debt instruments  at  amortised  cost       796,556,383   1,383,955,004    
Loans and advances (gross)       3,635,008,639   2,804,858,737    
Unsecured contingent liabilities and commitments      1,893,055,941   1,079,859,911    
    6,923,006,664     5,695,211,889   
Fair value of collateral held
The Bank holds collateral against loans and advances to customers in the form of mortgage interests over property, other registered securities over assets, and guarantees.  Estimates of fair value are based on the value of collateral assessed at the time of borrowing, and generally are not updated except when a loan is individually assessed as impaired.The Credit Committee also monitors the portfolio of loans and debt collection operations.
 y analyze the portfolio of loans: retail customers, companies, banks and financial institutions and sovereign,
 y monitor irregular commitments  and the main sensitive risks, y monitor debt collection  files,
 y assess guarantees and monitor provisions,
 y ensure  that the actions reported are monitored and performed
Using provisions made on facilities above 90 days, the credit risk exposure for the bank is considered to be stable over a three year period.
An estimate of the fair value of collateral and other security enhancements held against financial assets is shown below:
  2022   2021  
 GH¢  GH¢
Against impaired assets   725,601,968   243,630,045   
Against past due but not impaired assets    152,130,168   34,877,174   
   877,732,136   278,507,219  
Liquidity risk and structural interest rate risk
Liquidity riskLiquidity risk arises from the mismatch of the timing of cash flows relating to assets and liabilities. The liquidity policy of 
the Bank is approved by the Board under guidelines issued by Societe Generale Group and monitored daily to ensure that its funding requirements can be met at all times and that a stock of high quality liquid assets is maintained.
The net liquidity gap resulting from liquidity analysis of  assets  and  liabilities  of  the  Bank  as at  31 December 2022   is 
shown in the table below.
101
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Maturity analysis of assets and liabilities
The table shows a summary of assets and liabilities analysed according to their contractual terms of the transactions and 
models of historic client behaviour as well as conventional assumptions for some balance sheet items.
  Below 3  3 to 6   6 to 12  Above 1
As at 31  December  2022 Total months  months   months  year
 GH¢ GH¢  GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Assets   
Cash and cash equivalents     1,950,873,066   1,950,873,066      - - -
Non-pledged trading assets   14,157,407   14,157,407     - - -
Debt instruments  at fair value through other comprehensive income     43,784,934      - - -    43,784,934    
Investment securities    796,556,383   739,606,359   462,273   274,124   56,213,627    
Loans and advances to customers     3,102,993,067   750,097,821   433,447,710   676,717,244   1,242,730,292     
Equity investments      3,549,552       - - -      3,549,552      
Derivative assets held for risk management   188,780,000   188,780,000   - - -
Other assets     101,997,533   71,398,270   20,399,505  10,199,758     -
Property, plant and equipment   292,785,473      - - -    292,785,473   
Intangible assets     10,499,595     - - -    10,499,595   
Deferred tax assets    89,859,093   89,859,093       - - -
Total assets   6,595,836,103   3,804,772,016   454,309,488   687,191,126   1,649,563,473    
Liabilities
Deposits from banks   1,145,398   1,145,398     - - -
Deposits from customers   4,239,568,200   900,909,199   457,145,818   621,765,959   2,259,747,224     
Borrowings   642,585,961   26,800,000   35,207,890   43,813,982   536,764,090   
Current tax liabilities       57,267,488   57,267,488      -  - -
Other liabilities      566,631,231   169,989,368   169,989,370   226,652,493     -
Total liabilities     5,507,198,278   1,156,111,455   662,343,078   892,232,432   2,796,511,314    
Net liquidity gap    1,088,637,826   2,648,660,561   (208,033,588)  (205,041,307)  (1,146,947,841)
Contingent liabilities        1,893,055,941   1,508,540,653   218,567,140   78,381,682   87,566,466    
102
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
The gap profile is the difference between assets and liabilities which is calculated for each time- bucket. The results of this 
calculation are stressed and analysed through the internal ALM Report or the Group Report Structural Risk Committee.Societe Generale Ghana PLC has a large and diversified deposit base which serves as a large part of mid and long-term financing resources.
Contractual maturities of undiscounted cash flows of financial assets and liabilities
The table shows a summary of financial assets and liabilities analysed according to their undiscounted contractual terms of 
the transactions and models of historic client behaviour (models determined with the contribution of the Group), as well as conventional assumptions for some balance sheet items.  Below 3  3 to 6   6 to 12  Above 1
As at 31  December  2021 Total months  months   months  year
 GH¢ GH¢  GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Assets   
Cash and cash equivalents   963,248,795   963,248,795  - - -
Non-pledged trading assets  143,156,280   143,156,280   - - -
Debt instruments  at fair value through other comprehensive income  87,240,744   - - -   87,240,744  
Investment securities   1,384,667,134   1,331,168,093   21,146,405   1,011,716   31,340,919  
Loans and advances to customers  2,504,366,677   497,833,962   303,401,761   508,086,205   1,195,044,749 
Equity investments   2,923,386   - - -  2,923,386  
Other assets  54,130,184   37,891,129   10,826,037   5,413,018   
Property, plant and equipment  255,268,418   - - -  255,268,418  
Intangible assets   15,009,794   - - -  15,009,794  
Deferred tax assets   27,010,707   27,010,707   - - -
Total assets  5,437,022,119   3,000,308,966   335,374,203   514,510,939   1,586,828,010 
Liabilities
Deposits from banks  1,916,501   1,916,501   - - -
Deposits from customers  3,391,140,683   1,043,511,541   461,185,629   450,845,989   1,435,597,523  
Borrowings  588,864,628   108,860,563   6,307,983   25,077,046   448,619,037 
Derivative liabilities held for risk management  40,509,648   40,509,648  - - -
Current tax liabilities   21,325,186   21,325,186   - - -
Other liabilities   364,700,136   138,816,628   138,816,668   87,066,839   -
Total liabilities   4,408,456,782   1,354,940,067   606,310,280   562,989,874   1,884,216,560  
Net liquidity gap  1,028,565,337   1,645,368,899   (270,936,077)  (48,478,935)  (297,388,550)
Contingent liabilities    1,079,859,911   941,373,439   54,859,066   80,577,097   3,050,310  
103
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
As at 31 December 2021   Below 3   3 to 6   6 to 12  Above 1
  Total   months   months   months  year
  GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Financial assets     
Cash and cash equivalents     963,248,795   963,248,795       -     -     -   
Non-pledged trading assets     143,156,280   143,156,280        -     -     -   
Debt instruments  at fair value through     87,240,744  -   -   -     87,240,744                
other comprehensive income 
Debt instruments  at  amortised  cost      1,563,556,858   1,501,728,024   23,926,499   1,158,439   36,743,895    
Loans and advances to customers     2,799,083,006   516,365,831   325,990,022   583,740,241   1,372,986,912    
Equity investments    2,923,386     -      -     -      2,923,386  
Total financial assets    5,559,209,069   3,124,498,930   349,916,521   584,898,680   1,499,894,937    
Financial liabilities     
Deposits from banks     1,916,501   1,916,501      -     -     -    
Deposits from customers     3,421,828,257   1,060,875,539   471,172,240   454,182,955   1,435,597,523    
Borrowings   607,370,049   109,852,641   7,459,642   26,424,679   463,633,087   
 Total financial liabilities     4,031,114,807   1,172,644,681   478,631,882   480,607,634   1,899,230,610   
Structural interest rate
The interest rate risk is the incurred risk in case of  interest  rate  variations  because  of  all  on-and off- financial position 
operations,  except operations subject to market risks. Global Interest Rate Risk is corresponding to interest rate on the banking portfolio.
The strategic management of liquidity is done at a high level of Senior Management (ALCO); review of results on weekly 
basis in line with competition and economic conditions and also ensure that regulatory requirements are met.
The risk management is supervised by the Group. Limits are defined at Group consolidated level and at the level of each 
Group consolidated entity, and are validated by the Credit Risk Committee. The Finance department of the Group is responsible for checking the risk level of Societe Generale Ghana Plc.As at 31 December 2022   Below 3   3 to 6   6 to 12  Above 1
  Total   months   months   months  year
  GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Financial assets     
Cash and cash equivalents    1,950,873,067   1,950,873,067       -     -     -   
Non-pledged trading assets      14,157,406   14,157,406        -     -     -   
Debt instruments  at fair value through other    55,486,901   -   -   -     55,486,901    
comprehensive income 
Debt instruments  at  amortised  cost      985,182,004   913,004,879   589,510   350,328   71,237,287    
Loans and advances to customers       3,834,539,947   815,412,589   490,061,400   853,492,706   1,675,573,252      
Equity investments       3,549,552   -      -      -          3,549,552    
Total financial assets      6,843,788,877    3,693,447,941   490,650,910   853,843,034   1,805,846,992       
Financial liabilities     
Deposits from banks    1,145,398   1,145,398      -     -     -    
Deposits from customers     4,292,690,474   940,205,280   466,209,760   626,528,210   2,259,747,224     
Borrowings    686,369,055   27,209,169   9,892,949   37,721,784   611,545,153    
 Total financial liabilities     4,980,204,927   968,559,847   476,102,709   664,249,994   2,871,292,377    
104
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Interest Rate Risk Exposure
Interest rate risk exposure  is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate because 
of changes in market interest rates. The Bank’s exposure to the risk of changes in market interest rates relates primarily to the financial assets and liabilities  with variable/floating interest rates. The following table demonstrates the sensitivity to a reasonable possible change in interest rates, with all other variable held constant, of the Bank’s profit before tax (through the impact on the floating rate financial assets and liabilities). 
Sensitivity of projected increase or decrease in  interest rate is analysed below.
Market risk
Market risk is the risk of losses being incurred as a result of adverse movements in interest or exchange rates and arises in the Bank’s treasury activities.
Market risk is controlled by interest mismatch and foreign currency open position limits approved by the Executive 
Committee of the Bank and monitored daily. The foreign currency exposure analysis of the Bank is shown in the currency exposure table below.Increase/decrease 
in basis points 
 2022 
Increase/decrease 
in basis points 
 2021 Effect on profit  
before tax 
 2022 
Effect on profit  
before tax 
 2021 Effect on equity 
 2022 
Effect on equity 
 2021 31 DecemberSociete Generale Ghana PLC’s main aim is to reduce its exposure to structural interest rate risk as much as possible. To this end, any residual interest rate risk exposure must comply with the sensitivity limits set by the Group Financial Committee (COFI). The sensitivity is defined as the variation in the net present value of future (maturities of up to 20 years) residual fixed rate positions (surplus or deficits) for a 10 basis point parallel increase or decrease in the yield curve. The limit for Societe Generale Ghana PLC for the various currencies is within the range of EUR -0.58 and 0.18 million (i.e. between GH¢ -5.30 and 1.65 million). This limit is -0.49% and 0.15% of shareholders’ equity in reference to the lower and upper limits respectively 
In order to quantify its exposure to structural interest rate risks, Societe Generale Ghana PLC analyses all fixed- rate assets 
and liabilities on future maturities to identify any gaps. These positions come from their maturities. Once the Bank has identified the gaps of its fixed- rate positions (surplus or deficit), it calculates the sensitivity (as defined above) to variations in interest rates.
In order to quantify its exposure to structural interest rate risks,  Societe Generale Ghana PLC analyses all  fixed- rate assets 
and liabilities on future maturities to identify any gaps.  These positions come from their maturities.
Once the Bank has identified the gaps of its fixed- rate positions (surplus or deficit), it  calculates the sensitivity (as defined 
above) to variations in interest rates. This sensitivity is defined as the variation of the net present value of the fixed-rate positions for an instantaneous parallel increase of 1% of the yield curve.
   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢       
USD    +1%   -1%   12,841,133   (12,841,133)  8,346,736   (8,346,736)
EURO    +1%   -1%   1,092,264   (1,092,264)  709,972   (709,972)
GH¢    +1%   -1%   22,416,689   (22,416,689)  14,570,848   (14,570,848)
31 December    GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
USD +1%  -1%   9,784,215   (9,784,215)  6,848,951   (6,848,951)
EURO +1%  -1%   1,193,607   (1,193,607)  835,525   (835,525)
GH¢ +1%  -1%   18,054,938   (18,054,938)  12,638,457   (12,638,457)
105
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
This risk is managed by the establishment of limits, monitoring of exposures on a daily basis and ensuring that regulatory 
requirements are met.
The task of the Market Risk Committee is to:
 y identify,  assess and monitor the market risks generated by transactions made on behalf of:
 y the local Financial department (cash,  liquid assets,  balance  sheet  hedging) in relation with the Assets and Liabilities 
Management Committee
 y professional customers (companies and institutional investors)
 y define and monitor alert procedures
 y make sure that the Back Office is really independent of  the Front Office.
Exchange rate sensitivity analysisThe Bank’s foreign exchange exposures comprise trading and non-trading foreign currency translation exposures.  Foreign exchange exposures are principally derived from customer driven transactions.  The sensitivity rates used represents management’s assessment of the reasonably possible change in foreign exchange rates. The sensitivity analysis includes only outstanding foreign currency denominated monetary items and adjusts their translation at the period end for the changes in foreign currency rates. A positive number below indicates an increase in profit or equity whilst a negative number indicates a decrease in profit or equity. The profits below are the result of a net long exposure in the foreign currency coupled with an increase in the foreign currency rate. The losses on the other hand are mainly due to a net long exposure in the foreign currency coupled with  a decrease in the foreign currency rate.
Increase/decrease 
in basis points 
 2022 
Increase/decrease 
in basis points 
 2021 Effect on profit  
before tax 
 2022 
Effect on profit  
before tax 
 2021 Effect on equity 
 2022 
31 December
31 December    GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
USD +1% -1%  (620,005)  620,005   (403,003)  403,003   
GBP +1% -1%  1,417   (1,417)  921   (921))
EUR +1% -1%  83,596   (83,596)  54,338   (54,338)  
Other currencies +1% -1%  28,010   (28,010)  18,207   (18,207)
    GH¢   GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
USD +1% -1%  (82,013)  82,013   (57,409)  57,409   
GBP +1% -1%  1,481   (1,481)  1,036   (1,036)
EUR +1% -1%  (283,816)  283,816   (198,671)  198,671   
Other currencies +1% -1%  23,135   (23,135)  16,195   (16,195)Effect on equity 
 2021 
106
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
Exchange rate sensitivity analysis
The following methods and assumptions used in the 
computation of sensitivity analysis
i. Foreign currency exposure is assumed to remain at 
constant values (closing balances at the end of the year).
ii. Use of average exchange rate for the year under consideration.
iii. Use of pre-determined stress levels (relevant range of stress level) based on extreme or worst case scenarios.
iv. There are no changes in the methods and assumptions from the previous periods.
v. The current corporate tax rate is applied in determining the effect on profit and equity.
Currency riskCurrency risk is the risk that the value of a financial instrument will fluctuate due to changes in foreign exchange rates. In Ghana, market activities is mostly affected by  movements in the dollar. The cedi has depreciated consistently over the last three years. The Statement Of Financial position  of  SG Ghana is structured to take the upside of such a depreciating trend. The currency risk of the bank has been stable over a three year period.SG Ghana manages currency risk by monitoring the open currency positions on a daily basis. The objective of monitoring the open position in foreign currency is to manage foreign exchange risk due to movements in rates as well as changes in liquidity positions. The bank has adopted the Bank of Ghana requirement that banks maintain a total open position which is not more than 10% of their net worth. Within this limit, banks are also required to maintain single currency open positions not more than 5% of net worth.  The bank uses the mid revaluation rates published by the Bank of Ghana at the end of each working day. The year end rates used for foreign exchange translations of the major currencies are as follows: USD - 8.5760, EUR - 9.1457 and GBP - 10.3118.
Currency Exposure
The table below summarises the Bank’s exposure to foreign exchange rate risks at year- end. The amounts stated in the table are the cedi equivalent of the foreign currencies.
31 December 2022       
  USD GBP  EURO   Others  Total
  GH¢ GH¢  GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Assets
Cash and balances with Bank of Ghana    8,331,241   1,819,311   7,360,354   -                   17,510,906   
 Due from other banks and financial institutions     415,863,278   29,922,164   410,660,188   2,827,467                 859,273,097   
 Other assets      118,943   -    -  -                          118,943  
 Loan and advances to customers       1,283,592,509   -     108,655,997   -             1,392,248,506 
 Total assets      1,707,905,971   31,741,475   526,676,539   2,827,467           2,269,151,452     
 Liabilities       
Due to other banks and financial institutions     619,830,400   -     13,718,550   -                633,548,950 
 Due to customers       1,624,264,631   28,742,618   258,072,176   33,101             1,911,112,525    
 Other liabilities       347,240,162   2,855,290   242,231,121   23,653                 592,350,226  
Total liabilities      2,591,335,193   31,597,908   514,021,847   56,754           3,137,011,701
Net on balance sheet position       (883,429,222)  143,567   12,654,692   2,770,713            (867,860,250)
Net off balance sheet position      866,450,540   -     (4,572,850)  25,220              861,902,910 
Net open position       (16,978,682)  143,567   8,081,842   2,795,933                 (5,957,340)
107
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
31  December  2021       
  USD GBP  EURO   Others  Total
  GH¢ GH¢  GH¢   GH¢  GH¢
Assets      
Cash and balances with bank of ghana    7,505,108   2,407,683   13,527,944   -     23,440,735 
 Due from other banks and financial institutions    133,453,630   28,096,627   170,109,673   2,338,000   333,997,930  
 Other assets    709   -     -   -   709 
 Loan and advances to customers    978,421,540   -     119,360,728   -     1,097,782,268 
 Total assets     1,119,380,987   30,504,310   302,998,345   2,338,000   1,455,221,643 
Liabilities
Due to other banks and financial institutions    568,327,213   -     17,070,250   -     585,397,463  
 Due to customers     992,155,792   24,631,840   177,090,318   25,510   1,193,903,460  
 Other liabilities     169,210,808   5,724,420   137,797,495   25   312,732,748  
 Total liabilities     1,729,693,813   30,356,260   331,958,063   25,535   2,092,033,671  
Net on balance sheet position     (610,312,826)  148,050   (28,959,718)  2,312,465   (636,812,029) 
Net off balance sheet position     602,111,525   -     578,160   -     602,689,685 
Net open position     (8,201,301)  148,050   (28,381,558)  2,312,465   (34,122,342)
Operational risk
Operational risk is the exposure to financial or other 
damage arising through unforeseen events or failure in operational processes and systems. Examples include inadequate controls and procedures, human error, deliberate malicious acts including fraud and business interruption. These risks are controlled and monitored through system  controls,  segregation  of duties,  exception and exposure reporting, business continuity planning, reconciliations, internal audit and timely and reliable management reporting. The operational risk environment remains stable over a three year period using the amount loss due to operational lapse. Control measures have have been implemented to prevent future occurrence.
Operational procedures are documented in an 
Operations Manual.
The   Bank   has   established   and   implemented an 
integrated Operational Risk (OR) framework comprising (i) Loss Collection policy, (ii) Key Risk Indicators (KRI) policy, (iii) Permanent Supervision policy, (iv) Compliance and anti- money laundering. Policy which set out the organizational structure, overall policy framework, processes and systems for identifying, assessing, monitoring and controlling/ mitigating operational risks in the bank.Societe Generale Ghana PLC has adopted the Societe Generale Group BCP policy and methodology which is consistent with international standards.
The Bank has also created a comprehensive and 
independent review of the Business Continuity Planning and Operational Risk processes.
The Operational Risk Committee’s task is to identify and 
assess the impact of operational risks on the smooth running and profitability of the bank, and to define and implement the strategy used to control them by continuously adapting the methods used to bring them into conformity with regulations in force and Societe Generale Group standards.
To achieve this, the Committee:
 y makes sure that the resources made available 
to the Operational Risk team are in line with the Bank’s level of exposure.
 y is responsible for the introduction and satisfactory operation of permanent supervision, and for the bank’s Operational Risk control.
 y is  informed of the main types of operational risks and of the main operating losses recorded over the period.
 y monitors  the implementation of plans of action intended to correct and reduce Operational Risks.
108
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
 y validates the findings of regulatory  exercises 
(Risk & Control Self Assessment (RCSA), scenario analysis, KRI), introduces and monitors corrective action plans. 
 y introduces, maintains and tests the BCP and the Crisis management system. 
 y makes sure that the work done by Permanent Supervision is of good quality and approves its report. 
 y takes corrective action in the event of a deterioration in the control environment.
 y keeps up to date with legislative and regulatory changes, as well as recommendations relating to periodic control.
 y drafts and presents its activity report particularly intended for the Audit and Accounts Committee.
Non compliance & reputation risk and the prevention of money launderingThe compliance function ensures that the risks of legal, administrative and/or disciplinary penalties, financial losses or injury to reputation, arising out of or in connection with failure to comply with local legislative and/or regulatory banking provisions, ethics and professional practices, as well as Societe Generale Group instructions, standards and/or processes are identified and controlled. Using incidence of non compliance and fines, the risk of non compliance has been stable over a three year period.
The bank’s compliance activity is overseen at a high 
level by a Senior Management Officer,  the Head of Compliance and through the Compliance Committee chaired by the Managing Director.
The main tasks of the compliance function are namely:y to define in accordance with  legal  and regulatory 
requirements, the policies, principles and  procedures applicable to compliance and the prevention of money laundering and terrorist financing and ensure that they are implemented.
y to ensure that professional and financial market regulations are respected.y to prevent and manage any potential conflicts of interest with respect to customers.
y to train and advise staff and increase their awareness of compliance issues.
38. Regulatory breachesDuring the year under review, the bank  breached  two sections of  the   Specialised  Deposit -Taking Instiutuions  Act, 2016  (Act 930).   The Bank  was levied   an amount  of GHS 252,000 in respect of regulatory breaches in relation to the breach of BOG directives and late submission of returns.
39. Segmental  reportingFor management purposes, the bank is organized broadly  into three  operating segments based on products and services as follows;
y Retail Banking- This Unit primarily serves the needs 
of individuals, high net worth clients, institutional clients and very small businesses. It is principally responsible for providing loans and other credit facilities, as well as mobilizing deposits and providing other transactions.
y Corporate Banking- This Unit is principally responsible for providing loans and other credit facilities, as well as mobilizing deposits and providing other transactions to the Bank’s corporate clients.
y Treasury- This Unit undertakes the bank’s funding activities. It also manages the liquidity position of the Bank through activities such as borrowings, and investing in liquid assets such as short-term placements and government debt securities.
Management monitors the operating results of each Business Units separately for the purpose of making decisions about resource allocation and performance assessment. Segment performance is evaluated based on operating profit or loss which in certain respects is measured differently from operating profit or loss in the financial statements. The main source of difference is the use of a transfer pricing mechanism in apportioning investment income for the segment.
109
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
31 December 2022  Retail Banking    Corporate Banking    Treasury    Total  
 GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢ 
Revenue     
Interest and  similar  revenue (3 parties )       285,120,714   374,376,515   -     659,497,229   
Interest and similar  expense      (57,806,255)  (74,315,887)  (2,808,534)  (134,930,676)
Net interest margin      227,314,459   300,060,628   (2,808,534)  524,566,553    
 
Fees &  commission revenue    63,949,924   40,247,030   975,169   105,172,123    
Fees &  commission expense     (30,345,190)  (5,968,762)  -     (36,313,952)
Net commission income      33,604,734   34,278,268   975,169   68,858,172    
Net trading revenue                                                                         52,975,420   42,758,581   -     95,734,001    
Net income from other financial instruments carried at fair value  -     -     64,104,688   64,104,688     
Other  operating income         3,952,691   44,365,879   -     48,318,570     
Total other operating income         56,928,111   87,124,460   64,104,688   208,157,259      
 Total operating income     317,847,304   421,463,356   62,271,323   801,581,983     
 Net impairment loss on financial assets        (73,490,144)  (211,246,896)  -     (284,737,040)
Operating income net of impairment charges    244,357,160   210,216,460   62,271,324   516,844,943    
Personnel  expenses        (83,882,960)  (74,867,666)  (12,870,385)  (171,621,011)
Depreciation/ amortisation      (18,890,750)  (17,900,185)  (2,643,000)  (39,433,935)
Other  operating  expenses        (54,465,755)  (72,269,220)  (10,670,705)  (137,405,680)
Total operating expense        (157,239,465)  (165,037,071)  (26,184,090)  (348,460,626)
Profit before tax      
 87,117,694   45,179,389   36,087,234   168,384,317      
Total  assets                                      2,421,679,348   3,965,772,775   208,383,980   6,595,836,103 
Total liabilites        2,466,806,248   3,040,392,030  -  5,507,198,278     
No revenue from transactions with a single customer or counter party amounted to 10% or more of the Bank’s total revenue 
in 2022  or 2021. All Segment revenue are from external customers only. The Accounting policies of the reportable segments are the same as the Bank. There were no intra company profit for the period under review.
110
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
31 December 2021  Retail Banking    Corporate Banking    Treasury    Total  
 GH¢   GH¢   GH¢   GH¢ 
Revenue     
Interest and  similar  revenue (3 parties )       257,730,555   253,262,374   -     510,992,929    
Interest  and similar  expense    (62,561,826)  (47,409,641)  (18,950)  (109,990,417)
Net interest margin      195,168,729   205,852,733   (18,950)  401,002,512   
 
Fees &  commission revenue    49,866,715   26,927,626   680,877   77,475,218    
Fees &  commission expense      (24,684,622)  (2,567,586)  -     (27,252,208)
Net commission income      25,182,093   24,360,040   680,877   50,223,010    
Net trading revenue                                                                       415,549   40,377,803   -     40,793,352    
Net income from other financial instruments carried at fair value  -     (27,729)  52,863,374   52,835,645    
Other  operating income     34,905,667   56,533,869   -     91,439,536   
Total other operating income     35,321,216   96,883,943   52,863,374   185,068,533    
 Total operating income      255,672,038   327,096,716   53,525,301   636,294,055   
 Net impairment loss on financial assets    (26,714,612)  (6,692,970)  -     (33,407,581)
Operating income net of impairment charges    228,957,426   320,403,746   53,525,301   602,886,473  
Personnel  expenses      (67,365,684)  (57,546,041)  (10,605,143)  (135,516,867)
Depreciation/ amortisation      (16,384,331)  (15,832,480)  (2,590,788)  (34,807,599)
Other  operating  expenses      (60,511,345)  (77,415,827)  (12,668,135)  (150,595,307)
Total operating expense       (144,261,360)  (150,794,348)  (25,864,066)  (320,919,773)
Profit before tax       84,696,066   169,609,398   27,661,235   281,966,699    
Total  assets       2,178,829,833   3,241,212,669   16,979,618   5,437,022,119    
Total liabilites      2,101,326,756   2,266,620,378   40,509,648   4,408,456,782   
40.   Capital
Capital management
The primary objectives of the Bank’s capital management are to ensure that the bank complies with externally imposed capital requirement by Bank of Ghana and that the bank maintains strong credit rating and healthy capital ratios in order to support its business and to maximise shareholders value. The Bank manages its capital structure and makes adjustment to it in the light of changes in the economic conditions and risk characteristics of its activities. In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure, the Bank may adjust the amount of dividend payments to shareholders, return capital to shareholders or issue capital securities. No changes were made in the objectives, policies and processes from the previous years.
a. Capital definition
The Bank’s capital comprises stated capital, share deals account, retained earnings including current year profit and various 
reserves the company is statutorily required to maintain. As a bank, it also has regulatory capital as defined below:
b. Stated capital
This amount is made up of issue of shares for cash and transfers from retained earnings.
111
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
c. Retained earnings
This amount represents the cumulative annual profits after appropriations  available for distribution to shareholders.
d. Revaluation reserve
This amount comprises revaluation of property, plant and equipment.
e. Statutory reserve
This is amount set aside from annual profit as a non-distributable reserve in accordance with regulatory requirements.
The transfer to Statutory Reserve Fund is in compliance with the Banks and Specialized Deposit Taking Institutions Act, 
2016 (Act 930).
f. Credit risk reserve
This is amount set aside from retained earnings as a non-distributable reserve to meet minimum regulatory requirements 
in respect of allowance for credit losses for non-performing loans and advances.
g. Regulatory capital
Regulatory capital consist of Tier 1 capital, which comprises share capital, share deals account, retained earnings including 
current year profit, foreign currency translation and minority interests less accrued dividend, net long positions in own share and goodwill. Certain adjustments are made to IFRS-based result and reserves, as prescribed by the Central Bank of Ghana. The other component of regulatory capital is Tier 2 capital which includes revaluation reserves.
h. Other reserves
This is made up of  FVOCI reserves on debt securities and FVOCI on equity investments. FVOCI reserve on debt securities 
records unrealized gains and losses on government securities.
i. Capital adequacy
 The adequacy of the Bank’s capital is monitored using, among other measures, the rules and ratios established by the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision and adopted by the Bank of Ghana.  The capital adequacy ratio of the Bank as of 31 December 2022  is shown below:2022
FVOCI
reserve
 
GH¢2021
FVOCI
reserve
GH¢
Opening balances     818,835    1,335,904  
 Movements in Fair Value  (507,879)   (689,425)  
Investment securities measured at FVOCI- tax    126,970    172,356    
    437,926    818,835  
112
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
 2022 Actual 2021 Actual
 GH¢   GH¢ 
Ordinary share paid up capital     404,245,427    404,245,427 
Income surplus      158,925,654    69,064,959    
Profit to date  160,426,390   184,329,633 
Reserve fund      292,518,630   246,436,221   
      1,016,116,101    904,076,240       
Regulatory adjustments 166,451,841    93,779,813      
CET 1 Capital      849,664,260    810,296,427    
CET 2 Capital     74,202,155     61,835,129      
Total regulatory capital     923,866,416     872,131,557    
Risk-weighted assets
Credit Risk 4,710,660,094     2,989,067,556 
Market Risk 53,790,734     40,130,738  
Operational Risk 1,008,749,812     868,255,691  
Total Risk Weighted Assets 5,773,200,640   3,897,453,985  
Common Equity Tier 1 / RWA 14.72% 20.79%
Capital adequacy Ratio 16.00% 22.38%
41. Compliance  status of externally imposed capital requirementDuring the past year Societe Generale Ghana PLC had complied in full with all its externally imposed capital requirements.Analysis of Shareholdings
Category  Number of   Number of  Percentage
  shareholders   shares  Holding %
1-1,000     26,932   8,206,316  1.16%
1,001-5,000     5,077   8,485,408  1.20%
5,001-10,000     879   5,762,406  0.81%
Over 10,000     659   686,687,237  96.83%
   33,547   709,141,367  100.0%
42. Subsequent events
On 5 December 2022, the Government of Ghana launched the Domestic Debt Exchange Program (DDEP) for  a voluntary 
exchange of holdings of domestic notes and bonds of the Republic, including ESLA and Daakye bonds for a package of new bonds to be issues by the Republic. The existing Government bonds were replaced with a series of 12 new bonds with new repayment terms ( interest rates and maturity dates).  Treasury bills were however exempted from the exchange. Individuals who were initially exempted from the exchange were later encouraged to participate. The program forms part of Government efforts to restructure its existing debt portfolio and service its current obligations in order to secure IMF funding. 
113
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes to the Financial Statements cont’d
The Government’s Domestic Debt Exchange Program (DDEP) closed on Friday 10 February 2023 with over 80% participation 
of eligible bonds. SG Ghana participated in the DDEP . An impairment of the existing bond holdings was computed and adjusted in the 2022 financials. The total value of bonds exchanged (cost and capitalized interest) amounted to GH¢ 142,296,059. Total impairment relating to the these bonds was GH¢68,781,952. The impact to the profitability, liquidity and solvency of the bank was not significant.
114
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC 
 2022 2021
Value added statements for the year ended 31  December    GH¢   GH¢ 
Interest earned and other operating income        972,826,612    773,536,678   
Direct cost     (171,244,628) (137,242,625)
Value added by banking services       801,862,105   636,294,053 
Impairment   (284,737,040)  (33,407,581)
Value added          516,844,943    602,886,472   
 
Distributes as follows:   
To employees :-   
Directors (without executives)     (2,064,123)  (951,893)
Executive directors  (3,425,044)  (2,628,396)
Other employees     (168,195,967)  (132,888,471)
To government :- Income tax  (59,544,391)  (97,637,066)
To providers of capital :- Dividend to shareholders   To expansion and growth :- Depreciation    (32,747,077)  (30,463,364)
Amortisation    (6,686,857)  (4,344,234)
Other operating cost    (135,341,557)  (149,643,414)
To retained earnings        108,839,926    184,329,633 Value added statement
115
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC Twenty Largest Shareholders 
Shareholders                                                                   Account Name 1 SG-FINANCIAL SERVICES HOLDING, 427,079,030  60.22 
2 SOCIAL SECURITY AND NATIONAL INSURANCE TRUST , 137,262,404   19.36 
3 OFORI, DANIEL 48,241,241   6.80 
4 SCGN / ENTERPRISE LIFE ASS. CO. POLICY HOLDERS  9,989,540   1.41 
5 SCGN/CITIBANK KUWAIT INV AUTHORITY 4,209,470   0.59 
6 AMENUVOR, GIDEON 3,693,934   0.52 
7 SCGN/’EPACK INVESTMENT FUND LIMITED TRANSACTION 3,515,443   0.50 
8 SOCIETE GENERALE EMPLOYEES’ SHARE OWNERSHIP  3,348,127   0.47 
9 ENO INTERNATIONAL LLC, 2,494,761   0.35 
10 SCGN/JPMSE LUX RE ROBECO AFRIKA FONDS N.V. -EMJ83  2,193,248   0.31 
11 SCGN/CACEIS BANK RE:HMG GLOBETROTTER  2,125,646   0.30 
12 SCGN/DATABANK BALANCED FUND LIMITED  2,051,093   0.29 
13 MR. PHILIP OPOKU-MENSAH  2,000,000   0.28 
14 ADJEPON-YAMOAH, BEATRICE E. MRS  1,982,930   0.28 
15 EDC/TEACHERS EQUITY FUND,  1,746,206   0.25 
16 HFCN/ EDC GHANA BALANCED FUND LIMITED 1,540,476   0.22 
17 SCGN/PETRA ADVANTAGE PORTFOLIO EQUITIES DATABANK ACCOUNT  1,448,372   0.20 
18 SCGN/SSB EATON VANCE TAX-, MANAGED EMERGING MARKET FUND  1,345,362   0.19 
19 MBG ESSPA SCHEME 1,009,233   0.14 
20 MINING INDUSTRY MASTER TRUST OCCUPATIONAL PENSION SCHEME 976,348   0.14 
 Total  658,252,864   92.82 
 Others  50,888,503   7.18 
 Grand Total  709,141,367  100.00%
 Director’s shareholding
Director   Shareholding
NIL  -
 ANALYSIS OF SHAREHOLDING AT  31 DECEMBER 2022
 NUMBER OF SHAREHOLDERS NUMBER OF SHARES  % HOLDING
NON DEPOSITORY 24,216 19,278,067 2.72 
DEPOSITORY (CSD) 9,331 689,863,300 97.28 
TOTAL 33,547 709,141,367 100.00Number or
Holding% 
OwnedShareholding structure
116
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNOTES:
i. In compliance with the current restrictions on public 
gatherings in force pursuant to the imposition of Restrictions Act, 2020 (Act 1012) and consequent Regulatory Directives, attendance and participation by all members and/or their proxies in this year’s Annual General Meeting of the Company shall be strictly virtual (i.e. by online participation).
ii. A member entitled to attend and vote at the Annual General Meeting may appoint a proxy to attend (via online participation) and vote on his/her behalf. Such a proxy need not be a member of the Company.
iii. The appointment of a proxy will not prevent a member from subsequently attending and voting at the meeting (via online participation). Where a member attends the meeting in person (participates online), the proxy appointment shall be deemed to be revoked.
iv. A copy of the Form of Proxy can be downloaded from the Societe Generale Ghana website https://
societegenerale.com.gh and may be filled and sent via email to registrars@nthc.com.gh or deposited at the registered office of the Registrars of the Company, NTHC Company Limited, NTHC House, 18 Gamel Abdul Nasser Avenue, Ringway Estate Accra to arrive no later than 48 hours before the appointed time for the meeting.Accessing and Voting at the Virtual AGM
v. A unique token number will be sent to shareholders 
by email and/or SMS from 15th September 2023 to 
give them access to the meeting.  Shareholders who do not receive this token can contact the Registrars NTHC Company Limited, NTHC House, 18 Gamel Abdul Nasser Avenue, Ringway Estate Accra on telephone number 059 310 5735 or by email  registrars@nthc.com.gh  or any time after 15th September 2023 but before the date of the AGM to be sent the unique token.
vi. To gain access to the Virtual Annual General Meeting, shareholders must visit https://sgghanaagm.com and input their unique token number shared with them to gain access to the meeting. For shareholders who do not submit proxy forms to the Registrar of the Company prior to the meeting they may vote electronically during the Virtual AGM; again, using their unique token number. Further assistance on accessing the meeting and voting electronically can be found on https://societegenerale.com.gh and  https://
sgghanaagm.com
For further information, please contact the Registrar:
NTHC Company Limited
NTHC House, 18 Gamel Abdul Nasser AvenueRingway Estate Accra PO Box KIA 9563, AccraTelephone No: 059 310 5735Email: registrars@nthc.com.ghAnnual general meeting guidelines
117
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCPROXY FORM
FOR ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING  
I/We …………………………………………………………………….......……………………………….……………...............……............ 
(Block Capital Please) 
Of ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….................….............. 
being member/members of SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC   hereby appoint…………………………….……….…………………………………………………………………….............….….............(insert full name) 
Of………………………………….………………………………………………………………………………….….........…………............. (or failing him the duly appointed Chairman of the meeting) as my/our Proxy to vote for me/us at the Virtual Annual General 
meeting to be held on Friday 29 September 2023 at 11:00a.m. and at every adjournment thereof): 
RESOLUTION FOR AGAINST
1. To receive the accounts
2. To re-elect Directors
3.      To approve Directors fees
4.      To authorize the directors to fix the remuneration of the Auditors5.      To amend the constitution of the company to provide that all Dividend Payments 
shall be through electronic means
Signed this …………… day of ……………………...................................................…… 2023 
Shareholder’s Signature………….................................................…………………………….
118
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCRESOLUTIONS TO BE PASSED
AT THE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
 BOARD RESOLUTIONS
 The Board of Directors will be proposing the following 
resolutions which would be put to the Annual General Meeting:
1.   RESOLUTION NO 1 TO RECEIVE THE 2022 ACCOUNTS
 The Board shall propose the acceptance of the 2022 Financial Statements as the true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company for the year ended 31 December 2022.
2.  RESOLUTION NO 2 TO RE-ELECT DIRECTORS
  3. APPROVE DIRECTORS FEES
 In accordance with Section 185(1)(2) of the Companies Act, 2019( Act 992) and Section 78(3) of the Constitution of the Bank , it is hereby proposed that the Directors remuneration be paid at such a rate not exceeding an aggregate of GHS1,583,920  It is further proposed that the Board of Directors be given the mandate to approve the emoluments of the Executive Director. 
4.  AUTHORISATION OF THE DIRECTORS TO DETERMINE THE REMUNERATION OF THE AUDITORS
 In accordance with Section 140 (1)(a) of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and Section 54(2) (d) of the Constitution of the Bank, the Board of Directors recommend that Deloitte & Touche continue as Auditors of the Company. The Board will request that they fix the fees of the Auditors. 
 5.  TO AMEND THE CONSITUTION OF THE COMPANY TO 
PROVIDE THAT ALL DIVIDEND PAYMENTS SHALL BE THROUGH ELECTRONIC MEANS
 In accordance with Section 30 of the  Companies Act ,2019 (Act 992) and the Constitution of the Bank, the Board of Directors are seeking shareholders approval to amend the Constitution of the Company to provide that all dividend payments shall be through electronic payments means.
119
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCTHE REGISTRAR
NTHC LIMITEDMARTCO HOUSEP .O.BOX KA 9563AIRPORTACCRA
FOLD HERE
FOLD HERE
120
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC121
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC122
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLCNotes
123
SOCIETE GENERALE GHANA PLC

Extracted from: Website-2022-ADB-Annual-Report-compressed-compressed.pdf
1         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements122The Peopleʼs Bank
  ANN UAL REPORTS20202022 Annual Report & Financial Statements2
3         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements3Vision 
To be the people’s Bank, harnessing the transformational 
power of agribusiness for wealth creation.
Mission
Growing a strong customer-centric Bank, providing profitable and diversified financial  services for a sustained contribution to agricultural  development and wealth creation.
Core Values
Trust: It is the currency that makes it possible for us to 
work together, build integrity and earn the right to be the people’s bank. 
Innovation: We will embrace our responsibility solve 
problems and consistently add value to our customers. Proactiveness: By putting ourselves in the customers 
shoes we will be timely in honouring our service promise.VISION, MISSION & 
CORE VALUES2The Peopleʼs Bank2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements4Notice of Meeting  05
Corporate Information 07
Report of the Directors 08
Information on Key Management Personnel  21
Report from Board Chairman  27
Report from Managing Director 30
Independent Auditor’s Report 33
Statement of Profit or Loss 38
Statement of Comprehensive Income                                                                       39
Statement of Financial Position 40
Statement of Changes in Equity 41
Statement of Cash Flows 43
Notes to the Financial Statements 44
Value Added Statement Appendix I
Shareholders’ Information Appendix II
About Us 105TABLE OF 
CONTENT2The Peopleʼs Bank5         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements5NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT the 36th Annual 
General Meeting of Agricultural Development Bank PLC will be held on Wednesday, August 9, 2023, at 11.00 a.m. GMT at the British Council Auditorium, Ridge, Accra to transact the following business
AGENDA1. To receive and consider the financial statements of 
the company for the year ended December 31, 2022 together with the reports of directors and auditors thereon;
2. To re-elect the following directors retiring by rotation under the Companies Act 2019 (Act 992):
i. Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II
ii. Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah
iii. Hon. Alhaji Habib Iddrisu
3. To authorise the directors to fix the remuneration of the auditors for the financial year ending December 31, 2023.
Dated this 19th day of July, 2023.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD SGD
GODWYLL ANSAH 
COMPANY SECRETARY
NOTES:
A. Proxy1. A member is entitled to attend and vote at the General 
meeting or may appoint a proxy to attend and vote on his or her behalf. Such a proxy needs not to be a member of the company;
2. A proxy form can be downloaded from www. agricbank.com and it may be filled and sent via email to info@csd.com.gh or deposited at the office of the company’s Registrar, Central Securities Depository on the 4th Floor, Cedi House, Liberia Road, Accra or posted to the Registrar at PMB CT 465 Cantonment, Accra to arrive at any time during working hours but not less than forty-eight hours prior to the commencement of the meeting.
3. All relevant documents in connection with the meeting are available to shareholders from the date of this notice on the company’s website (www.agricbank.com).For further information, please contact
The Registrar;
Central Securities Depository (CSD) Ghana Limited. 4th Floor, Cedi House, Accra Tel: (233) 0302 906576/0303972254 Email: info@csd.com.gh
The Board of Directors will propose the following ordinary 
resolutions, which will be put to the Annual General Meeting for consideration and approval:
1. To receive and consider the Financial Statements and reports of the directors and auditors for the year ended December 31, 2022.
The Board will lay before the Annual General 
Meeting for consideration, the audited accounts of the company for the 2022 financial year and reports of the directors and auditors thereon, as a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company for the year ended December 31,2022 and will propose the following resolution:
“That the accounts of the company for the year 
ended December 31, 2022 and the reports of the directors and auditor thereon be and are hereby deemed duly considered.”
2. To re-elect the following directors retiring by rotation
Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II (the Chairman 
of the Board of Directors), Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah and Hon. Alhaji Habib Iddrisu will retire by rotation in accordance with section 325 of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and clause 76 of the constitution of the company. Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II, Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah and Hon. Alhaji Habib Iddrisu, all being eligible for re-election have offered themselves to be re-elected as directors of the company. The Board will recommend that they be so re-elected as directors of the company and will accordingly propose the following resolutions:
i. “That Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II, who is retiring by rotation and who, being eligible, has offered himself for re-election in accordance with section 325 of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and clause 76 of the company’s constitution, be and is hereby re-elected as a director of the company. ii. That Prof Eric Yirenkyi Danquah, who is retiring by rotation and who, being eligible, has offered NOTICE OF 
MEETING2The Peopleʼs Bank2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements6himself for re-election in accordance with section 
325 of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and clause 76 of the company’s constitution, be and is hereby re-elected as a director of the company
That Hon. Alhaji Habib Iddrisu, who is retiring 
by rotation and who, being eligible, has offered himself for re-election in accordance with section 325 of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and clause 76 of the company’s constitution, be and is hereby re-elected as a director of the company3. To authorise the Directors to fix the remuneration of the auditors for the financial year ending December 31,2023
In accordance with section 140 of the Companies 
Act, 2019, the Board of Directors will request that it be authorised to fix the fees of the external auditors Ernst & Young, for the year ended December 31, 2023. The following resolution will be proposed:
“That the directors be and are hereby authorised to 
fix the remuneration of the auditor in respect of the year ended December 31,2023.”7         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements7BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II   ||  Chairman
Mr. Alhassan Yakubu-Tali   ||  Managing Director (Appointed effective December 1, 2022)
Dr. John Kofi Mensah   ||  Managing Director (Retired on November 30, 2022)
Mr. George Kwabena Abankwah-Yeboah   ||  Non - Executive Director
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie   ||  Non - Executive Director
Prof. Peter Quartey   ||  Non - Executive Director
Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare   ||  Non - Executive Director
Mr. Evron Rothschild Hughes   ||  Non - Executive Director 
Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah   ||  Non - Executive Director 
Hon. Alhaji Habib Iddrisu   ||  Non - Executive Director 
COMPANY SECRETARY
Mr. Godwyll Ansah
Accra Financial Centre3rd Ambassadorial Development AreaP. O. Box 4191Accra
REGISTERED OFFICE
Accra Financial Centre
3rd Ambassadorial Development AreaP. O. Box 4191Accra
AUDITORS
Ernst & Young Chartered Accountants60 Rangoon LaneCantonments CityP. O. Box KA 16009, AirportAccra, GhanaCORPORATE 
INFORMATION2The Peopleʼs Bank2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements8REPORT OF THE 
DIRECTORS
Directors’ Responsibility Statement
The directors are responsible for the preparation of financial statements that give a true and fair view of Agricultural 
Development Bank PLC (ADB). These financial statements, include the Statement of Financial Position at 31 December 2022, and the Statement of Profit or Loss and other Comprehensive Income, Changes in Equity and Cash Flows for the year then ended, and the notes to the financial statements which include a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory notes, in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards and in the manner required by the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised Deposit–Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930). In addition, the directors are responsible for the preparation of the report of the directors.
The directors are also responsible for excercising or issuing internal controls that they deem necessary for  the preparation 
of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and for maintaining adequate accounting records and an effective system of risk management.
The directors have assessed the ability of the Bank to continue as a going concern and have no reason to believe that 
the business will not be a going concern in the year ahead.
The auditor is responsible for reporting on whether the financial statements give a true and fair view in accordance with 
the applicable financial reporting framework.
Corporate Social Responsibility
Amounts spent on corporate social responsibility amounted to GH¢3m (2021: GH¢4m). These included best farmer sponsorship, donations to schools and others of national interest.
Financial Statements Review
The financial results of the Bank for the year ended 31 December 2022 are set out in the financial results below, highlights of which are as follows:
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
(Loss) /Profit after tax (attributable to equity holders)  (371,280)            81,602 
To which is added the balance brought forward 
On accumulated losses               (236,645)          (252,236)
              (607,924)          (170,634)
Out of which is transferred to:The statutory reserve in accordance with section 34 of the Banking Act.                        -             (40,801)
Transaction cost related to Right issue                                                                                                                                -                     -   
Transfer from/(to) credit risk reserve                 (67,054)           (25,210)
Leaving a balance to be carried forward of               (674,978)          (236,645)
Five-year Financial Highlights
2022 2021 2020 2019 2018
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 
Total assets                                                                              7,412,720 6,454,119      5,715,794 4,577,659 3,597,395 
Loans and advances to customers (net) 3,242,189 2,282,312      1,911,988 1,468,653 1,068,814 
Deposits from customers 5,864,850 4,927,216      4,281,037 3,392,209 2,586,265 
Shareholders’ equity 658,191 938,255        850,623 793,384 639,711 
Profit/(Loss)before tax (364,358) 126,097          97,690 17,884 34,057 
Profit/(Loss) after tax (371,280) 81,602 65,403 14,823 5,9082The Peopleʼs Bank9         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements9Earnings per share (Ghana pesewas): 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018
Basic (107.01) 23.52            18.85               6.00               3.00 
Diluted (107.01) 23.52 18.85 4.00 3.00
Return on equity (%) (56.41) 8.70 7.69 1.87 0.92
Return on assets (%) (5.01) 1.26 1.14 0.32 0.16
Number of staff     1,482 1,481            1,460             1,489             1,195 
Number of branches and agencies 87 85                82                  82                  82 
The Bank recorded Loss after tax of GH¢ (371,280) (2021: GH¢81,602) for the year under review and there was no 
transfer to the Statutory Reserve from Retained earnings during the year (2021: GH¢40,801).  The cumulative balance on the Statutory Reserve Fund at the year-end was GH¢182,015 (2021: GH¢182,015).
Dividend  
The directors do not recommend the payment of dividend.  The directors consider the state of the Bank‘s affairs to be satisfactory.
Nature of Business
The Bank is registered to carry on the business of Universal Banking. The Bank’s principal activities comprise corporate banking and retail banking. There was no change in the nature of business of the company during the year.
The objective of the Bank is to provide unique Universal Banking products and services with emphasis on agriculture to 
both the local and international clients.
Shareholding
The Bank is listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange. The Bank’s shareholding structure at the end of the year was as follows:
 Shareholder Names  No. of shares held % Holding
1 FINANCIAL INVESTMENT TRUST (FIT)  222,218,113 64.05%
2 GOVERNMENT OF GHANA  74,579,327 21.50%
3 GHANA AMALGAMATED TRUST PLC  39,076,924 11.26%
4 ESOP  5,983,828 1.72%
5 DOE, OSCAR YAO O. Y. D.  2,631,681 0.76%
6 COFIE, MARK BLEWUNYO KODJO M. B. K. C.  2,100,629 0.61%
7 NANA, SOGLO ALLOH IV  54,800 0.02%
8PARACELSUS PHARMACY & MARKETING CONSULTANCY LTD,  P. P. M. C. L. 50,000 0.01%
9 BONDZI-SIMPSON, LESLIE  26,600 0.01%
10 MR. JOHN BEKUIN-WURAPA  20,000 0.01%
SUBTOTAL OF TOP 10  346,741,902 99.94%
Others  210,351 0.06%
TOTAL  346,952,253 100.00%
Related Party Transactions
Information regarding directors’ interests in equity shares of the Bank and remuneration is disclosed in Note 41 to the financial statements as well as those related to associated companies. Other than their contracts as directors, no director had a material interest in any contract to which the Bank was a party during the year. Related party transactions and balances are also disclosed in Note 41 to the financial statements. Related party transactions which are credit- related start with the Credit Committee. On presentation to the Board, the affected directors disclose their interest and recuse themselves for the deliberations. The approval is subsequently given, and balances are also disclosed in Note 41 to the financial statements.2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements10Auditor 
The auditors, Ernst and Young, have indicated their willingness to continue in office in accordance with Section 139(5) 
of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) as well as Sections 81(4) and 81(5) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930). The amount of audit fee payable as at 31 December 2022 was GH¢1,000,000 (tax exclusive).
Particulars of Entries in the Interest Register
The directors do not have any interest to be entered in the interest register during the year.
Ghana Debt Exchange Programme
On 5th December 2022, the Government of Ghana launched Ghana’s Domestic Debt Exchange programme, an invitation for the voluntary exchange of approximately GHS137 billion of the domestic notes and bonds of the Republic, including E.S.L.A. and Daakye bonds, for a package of New Bonds to be issued by the Republic. The Exchange excluded Treasury Bills in totality, and notes and bonds held by individuals (natural persons). Stress tests conducted by the relevant financial sector regulators to estimate the potential impact of the Debt Exchange for banks, specialised deposit-taking institutions (SDIs), insurance firms, asset managers, collective investment schemes, pension fund trustees, and regulated pension schemes indicate that the participation of the financial sector in the Debt Exchange could result in decline in profitability and inadequacy of capital. To moderate the potential impact on the sector, the Bank of Ghana announced regulatory reliefs for banks to help preserve financial stability. The terms of the exchange were contained in a Memorandum of Exchange issued by the Ministry of Finance, details of which have been discussed in Note 20(iii). Subsequently, the programme was concluded on February 21, 2023 with the settlement of the new bonds.11         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements11PROFILE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Name Nationality Age Position Other Directorships Held
Daasebre Akuamoah 
Agyapong IIGhanaian 39 Board Chairman• Sejukab Company Limited
• Kayrock Company Limited
Mrs. Mary Abla KessieGhanaian 67Independent/Non-Executive Director• Family Health University College and Medical School
• Zeepay Payment Solutions (Zambia) Limited  
Dr. John Kofi Mensah Ghanaian 61Managing Director
(Retired on November 30, 2022)• Ghana International Bank Plc
• Enyan Denkyira Rural Bank
• GET Fund
• Venture Capital Trust Fund
Prof. Peter Quartey Ghanaian 54Independent/Non-Executive Director• Startrite Montessori School 
• Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research
Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-AsareGhanaian 43 Non-Executive Director• Social Security and National Insurance Trust
• Ghana Export-Import Bank (GEXIM)
• Ghana Integrated Aluminium  Development Corporation (GIADEC)
Mr. George Kwabena Abankwah-YeboahGhanaian 62 Non-Executive Director• Sharp Pharmaceuticals Ltd 
• Gulf Consolidated Limited
• Kyauto Ghana Limited
Mr. Evron Rothschild HughesGhanaian 52 Non-Executive Director
Hon. Alhaji Habib IddrisuGhanaian 37 Non-Executive Director
Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah Ghanaian 64Independent / Non-Executive Director• Eric Danquah Foundation 
• African Plant Breeders Association
• West Africa Centre for Crop Improvement (University of Ghana)ProfileREPORT OF THE 
DIRECTORS2The Peopleʼs Bank2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements12Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II 
Independent and Non-Executive Director
Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II was appointed the Chairman of the Board effective 
September 1, 2021. He is 39 years old.
Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II is the Kwawuhene and the President of the Kwahu 
Traditional Council. He is also the Vice President of the Eastern Regional House of Chiefs. Daasebre previously worked as Audit Associate at KPMG (2006 - 2009) Account Clerk at Health Net (MHNGS), San Rafael, CA, USA (02/2010– 01/2011) and Inventory Manager at SEJUKAB Enterprise. He was the Superintendent Management Accountant (Capital and Cost) of Abosso Goldfields Ltd Ghana (09/2011 –08/2013), Consultant for Thonket Company Ltd. / Thonket Plantpool Ltd (1/1/2015- 31/08/2016) and Director of KAYROCK Co. Ltd. 
Daasebre is a Chartered Accountant by profession (Association of Chartered Certified 
Accountants (ACCA)-UK – Member) and further holds a BSc. Administration (Accounting Option) from University of Ghana, and an MBA in Finance and Investment Banking from Lincoln University – California, USA. 
Mr. Alhassan Yakubu-Tali
Managing Director (from December 1, 2022)Mr. Alhassan Yakubu-Tali was appointed the Managing Director of Agricultural Development Bank PLC effective December 1, 2022.
Until his appointment, Alhassan had held the position of Deputy Managing Director from 
August 2017. In that role, he provided support to the Managing Director with oversight responsibility of the Bank’s business banking, agribusiness and banking operations divisions as well as the over eighty-four (84) retail outlets. He was principally in charge of the core operations and business units of the Bank, with responsibility for the operational performance of the Bank as well as creating an environment that promoted staff commitment to the organisational vision, mission, and strategy.
He is a seasoned investment banker with over 19 years of international experience, 
spanning many multinational banks including HSBC, Lehman Brothers Investment Bank, Bank of Tokyo and Fimat International Bank. He has a strong foundation in economic principles with core competences in structuring financial transactions, asset and liability management, portfolio management, developing new businesses, equity and listed derivatives, retail banking, risk management and financial analysis.
Biographical Information of Directors
Independent Directors
The Independent Non-Executive Directors of Agricultural Development Bank PLC are directors who in the 
reasonable opinion of the Bank of Ghana, are able to exercise independent judgement in relation to their role as directors and are not employees of the Bank, civil or public servants or other government officials, persons with direct links with government, or persons who are actively engaged in party politics. 
Non-Executive Directors are independent of management and free from management constraints that could 
interfere with the exercise of their objective and independent judgments. The Directors collectively possess strong functional knowledge, expertise, and experience to make valuable contributions to the Bank.BIOGRAPHY OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
13         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements13As the executive with oversight responsibility of the Agribusiness Division, he chaired 
the ADB 1D1F Committee and led the drive to ensure that the Bank increased its loan portfolio in Agribusiness in line with the Bank’s strategy. He is a polyglot and speaks fluent English, German, Dagbani and Hausa.
Dr. John Kofi Mensah 
Managing Director (retired on November 30, 2022)Dr. John Kofi Mensah was the Managing Director of the Bank from August 1, 2017 to November 30, 2022. He is 61 years. Dr. John Kofi Mensah is a renowned Economist and Banker with 29 years of experience in different sectors of banking ranging from start-up and delinquent banks operations to, credit and treasury management of universal banks. Prior to this appointment, he held various roles at the Bank for Housing and Construction, Securities Discount Company (SDC), International Commercial Bank (Now FBN Bank), Unibank, First Capital Bank and also served as a board member at Cocoa Processing Company, Ghana Telecom University and Family Fountain Assets & Securities Limited. 
He holds a Doctorate in Business Administration (Finance) from the University of Zurich, 
Switzerland. He holds an MSc (Banking and Finance), cumlaude from Finafrica in Milan, Italy and a BA (Economics and Statistics) from the University of Ghana-Legon.
He retired on November 30, 2022.
Mr. George Kwabena Abankwah-Yeboah 
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Abankwah-Yeboah was appointed a director in August 2017. He is 62 years old. He is 
the Chief Executive Officer of Sharp Pharmaceuticals Limited. He is currently a director at United Perfumery and Pharmaceuticals Limited, and Gulf Construction Limited. He had previously served on several boards including Accra Technical University, CSRI STEPRI, Koforidua Technical University, and the Association of Ghana Industries.
He holds a Bachelor of Pharmacy (Hons) from KNUST, MBA (Finance) and an LLB (Hons) 
from the University of Ghana, Legon.
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie
Independent Non-Executive Director
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie was appointed a director in August 2018. She is 67 years old. She 
is currently a Non-Executive Director of Family Health University College and Medical School and Zeepay Payment Solution (Zambia) Limited. She is  a lawyer, a Notary Public, a certified Director, and Corporate Governance expert.
Mrs. Kessie previously served on the boards of British Telecom Global Services, and 
Kosmos Energy LLC. She has a wealth of knowledge and experience in the banking and financial sector and held several executive positions during her banking car eer.
She holds a Bachelor of Laws Degree from the University of Ghana and a Barrister at Law from the Ghana School of Law. She is a member of the Ghana Bar Association and the Institute of Directors, Ghana.
2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements14Prof. Peter Quartey
Independent and Non-Executive Director
Prof. Peter Quartey was appointed a director in August 2018. He is 54 years old. He is 
currently the Director of the  Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research at the University of Ghana, Legon. He is a former Head of the Department of Economics and a former Director of Economic Policy Management at the University of Ghana, Legon. He had previously served on a number of boards including the University of Ghana Credit Union, National Population Council, and the Finance and General-Purpose Committee at the University of Ghana. He was also a member of the University of Ghana Strategy Committee.
Prof. Quartey has provided consultancy services to various institutions including NEPAD, 
the World Bank, African Development Bank, and USAID. He has several publications to his credit. He holds a Ph.D. in Development Economics from the University of Manchester, an MPhil degree in Economics from the University of Ghana, and an MSc. in Quantitative Development Economics from the University of Warwick (UK).
Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare
Non-Executive Director
Abena Osei-Asare (MP) was appointed a director in August 2018. She is 43 years. Abena 
is an accomplished professional with a strong academic background and vast experience in finance and politics. She holds a Master of Science in Development Finance from the University of Ghana Business School and a Bachelor’s degree in Economics with Geography from the University of Ghana. She is a Chartered Accountant and Fellow of the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA) UK, and a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants, Ghana (ICA). She possesses a comprehensive understanding of financial and economic matters.
Abena has made significant contributions to both the private and public sectors. Her 
career in the private sector included roles as a Dealer (Trader) and a Customer Team Leader at Barclays Bank Ghana/ABSA Ltd. and as Assistant Director, Finance and Facilities, at New York University (NYU) in Ghana.
In politics, she has served as the Member of Parliament (MP) for Atiwa East since 2013 and 
has actively participated in Parliamentary Committees of Ghana’s Parliament, including the Public Accounts, Finance, Employment, Social Welfare, and State Enterprises Committees.
Abena’s commitment to financial expertise and dedication to public service has been 
evident during her tenure as Deputy Minister for Finance (Budget) and Deputy Minister for Finance (Revenue), where she played crucial roles in budget preparation, revenue mobilization, and financial compliance matters, contributing to Ghana’s economic growth and fiscal responsibility.
She is a Non-Executive Director at Ghana Exim Bank, Social Security and National 
Insurance Trust and Ghana Integrated Aluminium Development Corporation. She previously served as a director at National Health Insurance Authority and Coastal Development Authority.
15         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements15
Mr. Evron Rothschild Hughes 
Non –Executive Director 
Mr. Evron Rothschild Hughes was appointed a director effective August 12, 2020. He is 52 years old. 
A well-rounded professional with a broad, over three-decades career spanning banking, 
investment banking, consulting, and public policy, Mr. Hughes’ current professional focus revolves around Cybersecurity and Fintech. Over this period, he has worked with three Securities & Exchange Commission (SEC, Ghana)-Licensed and Regulated Investment Advisors/Banks, twice as CEO and once as Chief Investment Officer (CIO)/Head Asset Management; thrice with Universal Banks as Board Member, Head of Corporate Affairs, and as Research Manager; twice as Economic Advisor at the Office of The President of the Republic of Ghana; and twice as Associate Director with a Global Research firm.
A Cambridge Commonwealth Trust Scholar, Mr. Hughes holds an Executive Certificate 
in Bank Governance from Said Business School, Oxford University, UK; an Executive Certificate in Fintech from Judge Business School, Cambridge University, UK; a Cybersecurity Professional Certificate from Google with Certified CPE in Cybersecurity, Information Security, and SOC operations, including in offensive and defensive security operations as well as application security; and a Professional Certificate in Android Development from Google. In addition, he holds an Executive MBA in Finance from the University of Ghana Business School; an MPhil in Development Studies from Cambridge University, UK; and a B.A. in Political Science with Philosophy (Hons) Summa Cum Laude, from the University of Ghana. 
Habib Iddrisu 
Non –Executive Director Hon. Alhaji Habib Iddrisu was appointed director effective September 1, 2021. He is 37 years old. He is the Member of Parliament for the Tolon Constituency and the Deputy Majority Chief Whip in the Parliament of Ghana. Prior to his election as a Member of Parliament, he had held notable leadership positions in both the public and private sectors in Ghana and abroad. These include Deputy Head, Ghana Free Zones Authority (Tema Processing Zone) (April 2017 – December 2020), Chief Executive Officer, Fadhab Investment Company Limited, Ghana (June 2017 – 2020).
He holds bachelor’s degree in communication studies from African University College 
of Communications (AUCC) and other relevant career certificates including Graduate Certificate of Arts in Human Resource Management from the University of Notre Dame, Australia, Diploma of Leadership and Management, Cambridge International College, Australia and Certificate in Administration and Management, from Ghana Institute of Management and Public Administration (GIMPA).  Hon. Alhaji Habib Iddrisu is currently pursuing EMBA at GIMPA.
Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah 
Independent  and Non –Executive Director Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah was appointed a director effective September 1, 2021. Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah is a 64-year-old Professor of Plant Genetics at the University of Ghana, Legon. He is the founding Director of West Africa Centre for Crop Improvement, University of Ghana and the 2018 Laureate, Global Confederation of Higher Education Associations for the Agricultural and Life Sciences (GCHERA), World Agriculture Prize (WAP). He is also the 2022 Africa Food Prize Laureate. Prof. Danquah is a former Head of the Department of Crop Science, University of Ghana, Legon and a former Dean, International Programmes, University of Ghana. He is an adjunct professor at Cornell University, USA, the University of Western Australia, and Murdoch University, Australia. He is the President, African Plant Breeders Association (APBA), and Founder of the Eric Danquah Foundation. He has several publications to his credit. He holds BSc. Agric (Crop Science), University of Ghana; MPhil Plant Breeding, University of Cambridge, England; and a Ph.D in Genetics, University of Cambridge, England.
2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements16Biographical Information of Directors
Age Category Number of Directors
Up to 40 years 2
41 –  60 years 5
Above 60 years 3
Commitment to Corporate Governance
i.  Good corporate governance for enhanced   
 shareholder value
ii.  Clearly defined respective roles of Shareholders,   
 Board of Directors and Management in the   
 governance architecture
iii.  The Board of Directors to have majority of its   
 membership as either Independent    
 or Non-Executive Directors. These principles   
 have been articulated in a number of corporate   
 documents, including the Bank’s Constitution   
 and the Board Charter.
iv. There is a Board Charter which spells out the   
 functions and powers of the Board and Board   
 Committees. There are also various policies   
 which define the role of the Board and the   
 Managing Director with regard to certain specific  
 matters including staff hiring and discipline.
The Board of Directors
The Board is responsible for setting the institution’s 
strategic direction, leading and controlling the institution and monitoring the activities of Executive Management.
As of 31 December 2022, the Board of Directors of 
Agricultural Development Bank PLC consisted of nine (9) members, namely an Independent Non-Executive Chairman, three (3) other Independent Non-Executive Directors, four (4) Non-executive Directors, and one (1) Executive Director.
The Board members have a wide range of experiences 
and in-depth knowledge in management, economics, finance, law, and entrepreneurship, which enable them to make informed decisions and valuable contributions to the Bank’s progress.
The Board has delegated various aspects of its work to the 
Credit and Risk, Audit, IT, Research and Strategy, Human Resource and Governance, and Cyber and Information Security Board Committees.
Board Credit and Risk Committee
The role of the Committee includes:
i. Assisting Management in the recognition of risks 
and ensuring that the Board is made aware of inherent and emerging risks and to review all risks to which the Bank is exposed, assessing from time to time their relative importance and evaluating whether the resources and controls designed to manage each risk are proportionate to the quantum of risk involved.
ii. It reviews and approves the credit risk strategy and credit risk policies of the Bank. It assists Management in evaluating the overall credit risks faced by the Bank and sets an acceptable risk appetite and tolerance that the Bank is willing to engage and the level of profitability  that the Bank expects to achieve for booking  various credits. The management of credit risk largely encompasses activities relating to loans and advances, albeit that credit risks exist  throughout  the other activities of the Bank, both on and off balance sheet. These activities include acceptances, inter-bank transactions, trade financing, foreign exchange transactions, futures, swaps, options and guarantees, among others.
iii. It reviews operational and market risks faced by the Bank and the management of such risks.
iv. It ensures the establishment in the Bank of a compliance culture including Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (“AML/CFT”) risk management culture, and promotes the adoption of an appropriate ethical and compliance standards in the conduct of the business of the Bank.
v. The Committee review of risks with a frequency that it judges to be proportionate to their materiality to the Bank paying particular attention to new risks arising from changes in the Bank’s business strategy and those arising from the wider current commercial, economic and political environment. The Committee reviews the comprehensiveness of the records of risks from time to time and updates them where appropriate.
vi. The consideration prior to implementation of all new products, significant changes in the balance of the business of the Bank or scale of its operations in any area. The consideration of all proposed changes to key systems and operational controls.
vii. It assists management in the recognition of risks and also ensures that the Board is made aware of changes in the risk profile arising from:17         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements17  -   Asset quality concentration
  -   Counterparty limits
  -  Currency, maturity and interest rate mismatches
  -  The external environment, including country risk  
    for any country where the Bank has a significant       
              exposure
  -   Business strategy and competition
          -   Operational risk, including vulnerability to fraud,       
             human resources and business continuity
  -  Legal, compliance and reputational risk
viii. The committee annually reviews its terms of reference and modus operandi and makes recommendations for changes that it considers appropriate to the Board.
The composition of the Committee is as follows:
Name of Director Position
Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare Chairperson
Mr. Kwabena Abankwah-Yeboah Member
Mr. Evron Rothschild Hughes Member 
Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah Member
Audit Committee
The role of the committee includes:
i. Providing oversight of  the financial reporting 
process including the establishment of accounting policies and practices by the Bank;
 ii. Providing oversight of Internal and external audit functions;
 iii. Reviewing and approving the audit scope, depth, coverage and frequency and overall effectiveness;
 iv. Reviewing and monitoring the external auditors’ independence and objectivity, taking into consideration relevant professional and regulatory requirements;
 v. Reviewing coordination between the internal audit function and external auditors;
 vi. Receiving key audit reports and ensuring that Executive Management is taking necessary corrective actions in a timely manner to address control deviations and weaknesses, non-compliance with policies, laws and regulations;
 vii. Providing a linkage between the Board and the Bank of Ghana, reviewing examination reports, reviewing guidelines and circulars, and ensuring compliance;
viii. Annually recommending to the Board and Annual General Meeting (AGM) the appointment of the External Auditor, the audit fee; and to advise the Board on any questions of resignation or dismissal of the External Auditors;ix. Keeping under review the Bank’s policy on non-audit services provided by the External Auditors and recommending this to the Board, having due regard to ensuring that the provision of such services does not impair the External Auditor’s independence or objectivity.
The composition of the Committee is as follows:
Name of Director Position
Prof. Peter Quartey Chairman
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie Member
Mr. Evron R. Hughes Member
Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah Member
IT, Research and Strategy Committee:
The role of the committee includes: 
i. Providing leadership in the implementation of IT 
policy strategy for the entire Bank that will lead to effective use of IT to drive the Bank’s business;
ii. Reviewing and recommending all IT Policies recommended by the Management for the full Boad approval;
iii. Overseeing the deployment of new and cost-effective IT solutions with a view to monitoring and enhancing product quality and, customer service delivery, and reviewing their risk exposures to the Bank;
iv. Reviewing any significant IT incidents that have occurred and monitoring trends in repeated incidences;
v. Recommending for the approval of the full Board, any sourcing/introduction of new IT solutions in the Bank with a view to determining their sustainability for the Bank’s business;
vi. Reviewing the formulation and monitoring of the implementation of the approved Strategic Plan of the Bank;
vii. Clearly determining for the full Board approval, the annual Key Performance Indicators for Executive   Management based on the approved Strategic Plan;
viii. Proposing for the full Board approval, the reward for Executive Management upon attainment of approved performance targets and Key Performance Indicators;
ix. Advising the Board on how to allocate the resources of the Bank on a rational basis for sound commercial reasons: this must be done in accordance with the approved Strategic Plan. 2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements18Name of Director Position
Mr. Kwabena Abankwah-Yeboah Chairperson
Prof. Peter Quartey Member
Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II Member
Hon. Habib Iddrisu Member
Human Resource and 
Governance Committee
The role of the committee includes: 
i. Reviewing and making recommendations to the 
Board with respect to the size and composition of the Board, including reviewing Board succession plans;
ii. Assisting the Board as required in relation to the performance evaluation of the Board, its Committees and individual Directors; 
iii. Making recommendation to the Board on the appointment of the Managing Director, other Executives and Key Management Personnel;
iv. Reviewing and making recommendations on the remuneration strategy and packages of the Managing Director and other Key Management Personnel;
v. Reviewing reports on Senior Staff grievance and discipline and making recommendations to the Board.
vi. Considering and recommending to the Board an overall employment, compensation, performance management, retention and severance policy and philosophy for the Bank that is aligned with the Bank’s medium- and long-term business strategy.
vii. Having a strategic oversight of matters relating to the development of the Bank’s human resources with the main objective of attracting and retaining a competitive human resources base for the Bank.
The composition of the Committee is as follows:
Name of Director Position
Mr. Evron Rothschild Hughes Chairman
Prof. Peter Quartey Member
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie Member
Hon. Habib Iddrisu Member
Cyber and Information Security Committee
The role of the committee includes:
i. Determining the nature and extent of the significant 
cyber and information security risks that the Bank is willing to take in achieving its strategic objectives;ii. Identifying the cyber and information Security risks inherent in the business of the Bank, the control processes with respect to such risks and countermeasures;
iii. Outlining the enterprise and overall cyber and information security risk profile of the Bank;
iv. Ensuring the adequacy and effectiveness of the Cyber and Information Security risk management framework of the Bank;
v. Ensuring the effectiveness of the information technology governance and its operations in the Bank;
vi. Determining the cyber and information security risk management strategy of the Bank; 
The composition of the Committee is as follows:
Name of Director Position
Mr. Kwabena Abankwah-Yeboah Chairperson
Prof. Peter Quartey Member
Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II Member
Hon. Habib Iddrisu Member
Schedule of attendance at Board and Committee Meetings
The Board met fourteen (14) times during the year, and the Board Committees, cumulatively, met twenty-seven (27) times.
Below is the schedule of attendance at Board and Board 
Committee meetings during the year.
*Board (B), Audit Committee (AC), Credit and Risk 
Committee (CRC), Human Resource and Governance Committee (HRGC), IT, Research and Strategy/Cyber & Information Security Committee (ITRS/CIS), N/A as used above implies ‘Not applicable’; that is, the Director in question was not a member of the stated Committee and hence could not have been expected to attend the Committee meeting.19         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements19 Director  B  AC  CRC HRCH ITRS/CIS
Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II 14 N/A N/A N/A 7
Mr. Alhassan Yakubu-Tali 13 6 N/A N/A N/A
Dr. John Kofi Mensah 11 5 6 2 7
Mr. Evron Rothschild Hughes 13 6 8 5 N/A
Mr. George Kwabena Abankwah-Yeboah 10 N/A 3 N/A 7
Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare 6 N/A 8 N/A N/A
Prof. Peter Quartey 14 7 N/A 5 6
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie 14 6 N/A 5 N/A
Hon. Habib Iddrisu 11 N/A N/A 3 5
Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah 14 7 8 N/A N/A
Board Balance and Independence
The composition of the Board of Directors and its 
Committees is regularly reviewed to ensure that the balance, maintenance and mix of skills, independence, knowledge and experience are kept .
Code of Conduct, Ethics Charter and Conflict of Interest Policies
The Board has approved an Ethics Charter and a Conflict of Interest policy that regulate the conduct of Directors.  In addition, an approved Code of Conduct regulate the conduct of all employees. Management has communicated the principles in the Bank’s Code of Conduct to employees to provide guidance in the discharge of their duties. The above-mentioned policies set the standards of professionalism and integrity required for the Bank’s operations, which cover compliance with applicable laws, conflict of interest, environmental issues, reliability of financial reporting, anti-bribery, and strict adherence to laid down procedures, in order to eliminate the potential for illegal and unethical practices.
Anti-Money Laundering and Anti-Terrorism
The Bank, additionally has established Compliance and Anti-Money Laundering and Anti-Terrorism departments and put monitoring systems in place in compliance with the requirements of Ghana’s Anti-Money Laundering Act 2020 (Act 1044) and Anti-Terrorism Act 2008, Act 762. These include due diligence for opening new accounts, customer identification, monitoring of high-risk accounts, record keeping, training and sensitisation of staff on money laundering. These systems and measures assist in reducing regulatory and reputational risks to the Bank’s business.
Internal Control Systems
The Directors have overall responsibility for the Bank’s internal control systems and they annually review their effectiveness, including a review of financial, operational, compliance and risk management controls. The implementation and maintenance of the Risk Management and Internal Control Systems are the responsibility of the Executive Directors and Senior Management.  The systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure in order to achieve the Bank’s business objectives and to provide reasonable, but not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.  The Directors have reviewed the effectiveness of the internal control systems, including controls related to financial, operational and reputational risks that were identified by the Bank as of the reporting date but no significant failings or weaknesses were identified during the review.
Directors’ Performance Evaluation
In May 2022, and in compliance with Section 46 of Bank of Ghana’s Corporate Governance Directive (2018), the Board of Directors carried out self-evaluation for the period spanning January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021.
The performances of the Board of Directors as a college, 
the Committees, the Board Chairman, individual Directors and the Company Secretary were evaluated.
The evaluation process was designed to assess among 
others, the performances in the following areas:
• Effectiveness of Board
• Management oversight
• Strategic Plan setting and monitoring
• Availability and mix of right knowledge and skills inside 
and outside Board relationship
• Conduct of meetings and communication
• Effectiveness of Controls, Risk Management, and regulatory compliance.
The following is the summary of key findings from the Board evaluation that required remedial actions;
i.  Improvement in the tracking and effective 
implementation of Board directives and recommendations
ii.  Improvement required in the management and monitoring of the of the loan portfolio2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements20iii.  Enhanced efficiency and improvement in processes, 
including the turn-around-time for the credit process.
Subsequent to the evaluation, the Board and Management outlined measures to resolve the matters listed above. 
A full copy of the Board Self-Evaluation Report was 
submitted to the Bank of Ghana on July 4, 2022.
Professional Development and Training 
The National Banking College offered annual corporate governance certification training to all the Directors of the Bank.  The topics covered under the corporate governance certification training were:
• Internal Board Evaluations – Actions Before, During 
and After 
• Ethical Leadership and Conduct Challenges in the Boardroom   
• Risk Governa nce and Implication of the Risk 
Management DirectiveConflicts of interest
The Bank has developed an appropriate conflict-of- interest policy (Ethics and Charter) and instituted measures to prevent conflict of interest.  The Bank has established 
appropriate conflicts authorisation procedures by which actual or potential conflicts are regularly reviewed and authorisations are sought as appropriate.  The Bank also 
maintains an Interest Register pursuant to Section 196 of the Companies Act 2019 (Act 992). During the year under review, noentry was made in the Interest Register.
Approval of the financial statements
The financial statements of Agricultural Development Bank Plc, as identified in the first paragraph, were approved by the Board of Directors on April 30, 2023, and signed on their behalf by:
CHAIRMAN                                                            DIRECTOR
21         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements21KEY 
MANAGEMENT PERSONNELMANAGEMENT PROFILE
Alhassan Yakubu-Tali
Managing Director (from December 1, 2022)
Mr. Alhassan Yakubu-Tali was appointed the Managing Director of Agricultural Development Bank Plc effective December 1, 2022. 
Until his appointment, Alhassan had held the position of Deputy Managing Director from 
August 2017. In that role, he provided support to the Managing Director with oversight responsibility of the Bank’s business banking, agribusiness and banking operations divisions as well as the over eighty-four (84) retail outlets. He is principally in charge of the core operations and business units of the bank, with responsibility for the operational performance of the bank as well as creating an environment that promotes staff  commitment to the organisational vision, mission, and strategy.
He is a seasoned investment banker with over 19 years of international experience, 
spanning many multinational banks including HSBC, Lehman Brothers Investment Bank, Bank of Tokyo and Fimat International Bank. He has a strong foundation in economic principles with core competences in structuring financial transactions, asset and liability management, portfolio management, developing new businesses, equity and listed derivatives, retail banking, risk management and financial analysis.
As the executive with oversight responsibility of the Agribusiness Division, he chaired 
the ADB 1D1F Committee and led the drive to ensure that the bank increased its loan portfolio in Agribusiness in line with the Bank’s strategy. He is a polyglot and speaks fluent English, German, Dagbani and Hausa.
Dr. John Kofi Mensah 
Managing Director (retired on November 30, 2022)Dr. John Kofi Mensah was the Managing Director of the Bank until his retirement on 
November 30, 2022. He was appointed the Managing Director of the Bank on August 1, 2017. He is 61 years. Dr. John Kofi Mensah is a renowned Economist and Banker with 29 years of experience in different sectors of banking ranging from start-up and delinquent banks operations to credit and treasury management of universal banks. Prior to this appointment, he had performed various roles at the Bank for Housing and Construction, Securities Discount Company (SDC), International Commercial Bank (Now FBN Bank), Unibank, First Capital Bank and also served as board member at Cocoa Processing Company, Ghana Telecom University and Family Fountain Assets & Securities Limited.  He holds a Doctorate in Business Administration (Finance) from the University of Zurich, Switzerland. He holds an MSc (Banking and Finance), cum laude from Finafrica in Milan, Italy and a BA (Economics & Statistics) from the University of Ghana - Legon.
2The Peopleʼs Bank2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements22
Eno. Ofori-Atta
Deputy Managing Director
Mrs. Eno. Ofori –Atta was appointed Deputy Managing Director of the Agricultural 
Development Bank PLC on December 1, 2022.
She is an accomplished professional with over 15 years of experience in banking and 
financial services, providing strategic leadership, creating high performance teams across business units and functions at various levels. Prior to her appointment, Eno had been the Group Managing Director of SIC-Financial Services for 5 years where She played a pivotal role in redefining the business strategy, executing transformative programs, and implementing operational improvements.
She is a former Chief Executive Officer of Payflex Microfinance Company and former Chief 
Risk Officer of Women’s World Banking Ghana. Her extensive experience spans across several leadership roles, such as Branch Operations Manager, Head of Administration and Human Resources, Head of Risk, and Head of Credit Operation. She is a product of Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology where she obtained both a Master in Business Administration and Bachelor of Arts degree in the social sciences (Law & Sociology).
Godwyll Ansah
Company Secretary 
Mr. Godwyll Ansah was appointed the Company Secretary on 1st April, 2019. He is a 
seasoned legal practitioner with over 20 years’ experience in legal and banking practice ranging from Company and Commercial Law Practice, Regulatory Compliance, Anti-Money Laundering , Board Secretariat and Bad Debt Recovery.
He worked at Bank of Africa Ghana Limited from December 2006 to March 2019 having 
held several positions including Head of Compliance, Head of the Legal Department and Company Secretary. He also worked with Société General (Ghana) and Stanbic Bank GhanaLimited. Mr. Ansah holds a Master of Law (LLM) and Bachelor of Arts Degree (Law and Economics) both from the University of Ghana, Legon. He also attended the Ghana School of Law from 1999 to 2001 and was called to the Ghana Bar in October 2001. He is an adjunct lecturer of Company and Commercial Law practice at the Ghana School of Law.
He is a member of the Ghana Bar Association, Ghana Association of Restructuring and 
Insolvency Advisors (GARIA) and a Licensed Insolvency Practitioner.
Leon Bannerman–Williams
Chief Finance Officer (CFO)
Mr. Leon Bannerman–Williams was appointed Chief Finance Officer (CFO) of the 
Agricultural Development Bank (ADB) PLC on 5th February, 2019. Mr. Bannerman- Williams is an experienced Chartered Accountant. He began his career at the Controller and Accountant General’s Department in1989 and joined the Agricultural Development Bank in 1997 as a Finance Officer. He served in several capacities including, Branch Operations Officer from September 1999 to October 2005, for the Koforidua, Ring Road Central and Cedi House Branches respectively and was appointed the Branch Manager forthe Tema Main Branch in 2005. In 2007 he was transferred to the Head Office as the Financial Controller where he successfully led the team in the processes towards the Bank’s first adoption of the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS).
In 2010, Mr. Bannerman-Williams joined the Credit Risk Department as the Credit 
Portfolio Manager, a role that involved high level credit portfolio analytics for Executive Management. Later, was appointed as the Head of Monitoring and Recoveries Department in 2015. He is a qualified Chartered Accountant and holds Executive Master of Business Administration (Finance) degree from the University of Ghana Business School. Mr. Bannerman-Williams is a Fellow of the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (UK) and a Member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants (Ghana).
23         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements23
Kwame Asiedu Attrams
General Manager, Agribusiness
Kwame Asiedu Attrams assumed the role of General Manager for Agribusiness on 1st August 2019; he is a professional agriculturist with vast experience in the agricultural and financial sector. He has many years’ of experience in the Banking sector, having joined the Agricultural Development Bank in 2004 as a Credit Officer and later a Relationship Manager at the Agricultural Finance Department. As a Credit Officer in charge of Poultry and Livestock Projects, he managed the Bank’s Broiler Outgrower program. Also, in his role as a Relationship Manager, amongst several functions he was responsible for the efficient and effective management of Agricultural accounts. He was also responsible for the coordination, monitoring and evaluation of MIDA-funded projects for the Bank. He represented the Bank on several Committees and Boards of Ministries, Departments and Agencies.
Mr. Attrams joined Access Bank PLC, Ghana in 2017 as the Head of Agro Allied Unit and 
helped to set up the Agribusiness Unit of the Bank: he also developed the agricultural finance strategy and products for the Bank. He has had other prior working experiences at Afariwaa Farms and Livestock Products Limited as Production Manager and Nutritionist; the Institute of Economic Affairs as a Legislative Research Assistant attached to the Parliament of Ghana and the University of Ghana as a Teaching Assistant in the Faculty of Agriculture. Mr. Attrams holds a first degree in Agriculture (Animal Science) and an MPhil in Animal Science (Nutrition), both of which he obtained all from the University of Ghana. He also has several other certificates from internationally recognized institutions such as the Kansas State University, USA and Galilee College, Israel. He is an old student of Prempeh College, a married man and a devout Christian.
Enoch Benjamin Donkoh 
General Manager, OperationsMr. Enoch Donkoh was appointed in April 2019. He has a career in banking and his work expreience spans more than twenty years beginning at the Agricultural Development Bank (ADB) where initially he was with the Accounts department but was later moved to the Foreign Operations Department. He joined the Bank of Ghana (BoG) Banking Supervision Division for seven years and gained experiences in Internal Control Practices, Risk Management, and also best Banking Practices.
With his experience at BoG, he moved to work with a couple of Savings and Loans 
Companies, namely Pro-credit Savings and Loans Company as Head of Finance, Express Savings and Loans Limited as General Manager/Managing Director, and Global Access Savings and Loans as an Executive Head and later Executive Director. He also worked as the Head of Operations at the Micro Finance and Small Loans Centre (MASLOC). Enoch Benjamin Donkoh is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants, Ghana (1999), holds a Bachelor of Science in Administration (Accounting) from University of Ghana and an MBA (Finance) from Central University. He is the acting Director of Cyber and Information Security.
2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements24
Edward Ian Armah-Mensah 
General Manager, Business Banking
Mr. Edward Ian Armah-Mensah joined ADB as Executive Head, Corporate Banking in 
2010. He has also served as Chief Commercial Officer of the Bank, Group Head, Corporate Banking and is currently the General Manager, Business Banking. He has over 24 years’ experience holding senior roles in the Ghanaian banking industry and over this period he has successfully led and set up Corporate Banking and Non-Bank structures from greenfields. 
He has extensive experience in Corporate Finance with specialty in Deal Origination, Debt 
Restructuring, Trade Syndication, Trade/Cash Management and Asset Finance. He has deep and varied cross industry experience with Stanbic Bank (Ghana) Limited, Barclays Bank (Ghana) Limited and NDK Financial. Services Edward holds an Executive Master’s in Business Administration (Finance Option) and a Bachelor of Science in Business Administration both from the University of Ghana Business School. 
Samuel Dako
Chief Audit Executive
Samuel Dako is the Chief Audit Executive. He has over twenty-eight years of managerial 
experience in the Banking Sector. He joined the Bank as a Finance Officer, and has served in various capacities including Financial Controller, Head of Financial Reporting and Strategy, Manager - Research and Corporate Planning, Branch Operations Manager and other managerial roles. He also has relevant managerial experience in Retail Banking, Risk Management and Audit & Assurance. He is also a Non-Executive Director of Akuapem Rural Bank where he serves on the HR, Governance, Risk, Compliance, Audit, Strategy and IT & Cyber Security Sub - Committees of the Board. Samuel is an alumnus of University of Professional Studies, Accra (UPSA), University of Leicester Management Center (UK), GIMPA School of Technology, GIMPA Faculty of Law and Ghana School of Law.
Samuel Dako is a Lawyer and Chartered Accountant and a member of the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants Ghana, a Merit Award Holder. He holds MBA Finance from the University of Leicester, UK, Bachelor-of-Laws Degree from GIMPA. He also holds post graduate Diploma in Management Information Systems from GIMPA. He is a Certified ISO  
27001 Lead Implementer and Auditor.
Da-Costa Asiedu Owusu-Duodu
Chief Risk Officer (CRO)
Mr. Da-Costa Asiedu Owusu-Duodu was appointed as Chief Risk Officer(CRO) of the 
Bank on May 22, 2023. He started his banking career in the early days with Agricultural Development Bank as a Credit Officer in the Loans and Advances Department in 1996, and worked for two years, before leaving to join TechnoServe Inc. in 1998, CAL Bank in 2001, Universal Merchant Bank, in 2007 and back to Agricultural Development Bank, in 2019. Prior to his role as the Chief Risk Officer(CRO), he was the General Manager in charge of the portfolio of Special and Criticized Assets of Merchant Bank and was generally responsible for assessing and mitigating significant threats and losses to the bank’s capital and earnings. Mr. Owusu-Duodu has an in-depth knowledge and experience in the banking industry, in the areas of credit origination, project finance, syndication, Agricultural financing, debt restructuring and reorganization of distressed companies. With over 27 years’ experience in banking and a proven track record of success in the maintenance of high asset quality, he brings a wealth of knowledge and expertise to drive growth in a strong banking brand in Agricultural Development Bank. He holds a Master of Philosophy (MPhil) degree in Agri-Business Administration from the University of Ghana, Legon, and also a Bachelor’s Degree (B.Sc.) in Agricultural Economics from the same university.
25         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements25Mrs. Amelia Croffie
Head, Legal (General Counsel)
Amelia Croffie (Mrs.) is the Acting Head of Legal of the Bank. She has about 31 years working experience in Corporate Law and Banking and is engaged in legal advocacy. She holds a Bachelor of Arts Degree (Hons, Upper Division) in Law, Classical History & Civilization from the University of Ghana (1989) and a BL (Qualifying Certificate in Law) from the Ghana Law School (1991). She also holds an MBA (HR Option) from the University of Ghana (2003). She worked as a Teaching Assistant in Criminal Law and Police Administration at the Law Faculty of the University of Ghana (National Service) after her BL. She was the Legal Executive in Activity Venture Finance Company Limited (AVFCL), a government regulated venture capital finance company, which was set up among others to explore, pioneer and provide venture capital for businesses as a means of complementing the more traditional modes of lending in the financial sector. At AVFCL, she served in various roles including Board Secretary and was nominated as a member of the Board of Directors on the then Midland Savings & Loans Limited as representative of AVFCL. She also served as a member of the Board of Directors for several years at Nyankumase Ahenkro Rural Bank in the Central Region of Ghana.
Jonas Kwabena Safo Baah
Head, Human ResourcesMr. Jonas Kwabena Safo Baah was appointed as the Head, Human Resources, on 1st July, 2019. He has considerable experience in Human Resources Management which spans over twenty (20) years’ experience in Ghana, fifteen (15) of which have been in the Banking industry. He has very good knowledge of the Human Resources functional areas, especially, in the strategic areas of Performance,Talent and Succession Management. He has cross-industry experience having worked with First Atlantic Bank Limited, Standard Chartered Bank (Ghana) Limited, Ecobank (Ghana) Limited and The Trust Bank (TTB) Limited. He also worked at The Capital Group Limited and GCAA. He holds a Master of Business Administration (Human Resources Management option) and Bachelor of Arts (Political Science) degrees from the University of Ghana, Legon, and Bachelor of Laws (LLB) from GIMPA.
Bridget Kaminta Lekanong Nuotuo
TreasurerMs. Bridget Lekanong Nuotuo Kaminta joined ADB as Treasury Sales Manager in 2011 and has been the Treasurer of the Bank since December 2016. She has over 15 years’ banking experience 13 years of which has been in treasury management. Bridget began her banking career from Barclays Bank (Ghana) Limited where she was a Senior Dealer in charge of Retail and also held various positions in Retail Banking. 
Bridget holds an Executive Master’s in Business Administration (EMBA–Finance Option) 
from the University of Ghana Business School and a Bachelor of Commerce degree from the University of Cape Coast. She is also a Chartered Banker and a member of the International Financial Markets (ACI certified).
2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements26
Papa Arko Ayiah
Anti-Money Laundering Reporting Officer
Papa Arko Ayiah is the Anti-Money Laundering Reporting Officer of the Agricultural Development Bank PLC. He has 23 years of banking experience, all in the employ of our Bank. He joined ADB PLC in the year 2000 as an Officer Trainee with the Treasury Department and was on various schedules including Money Market Dealing. He also worked in the then Communications Unit of the Bank as a Senior Communications Officer. Before joining the ADB PLC family, Papa Arko had a stint in Spacefon Ghana, now MTN Ghana, as a Customer Service Representative.
Papa is a Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialist and a member of the prestigious 
Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialists (ACAMS), USA. He holds a Master of Laws in Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) from the Faculty of Law, University of Ghana; a Bachelor of Laws from the Faculty of Law, Mountcrest University College (affiliated with KNUST); a Master of Arts in Human Resource Management from University of Cape Coast; and a Bachelor of Educational Psychology also from University of Cape Coast. He is a member of the Network of Heads of Compliance/AMLROs of Accountable Institutions (Banks) in Ghana. He serves on the Executive Committee as the Organising Secretary.
Gideon Amonortey Otu
Acting Head, Internal Control and Due DiligenceMr. Gideon Amonortey joined ADB PLC in 2014. He is an experienced banker with over 15 years’ of industry experience in the area of Risk and Controls assessments, Governance, Operations Management, Fraud Management, Quality Standards, Investigations, Process Reviews and Standardization and General Due Diligence.
He is currently the Acting Head, Internal Control and Due Diligence ensuring that the 
Bank has robust internal control mechanisms in place to promote operational efficiency, risk management, and compliance with regulations and policies.Prior to his appointment as the Acting Head, Internal Control and Due Diligence, he occupied other roles in the Bank including Branch Manager, Operations Rigour, Quality Manager, and Manager, Internal Control and Due Diligence.Prior to joining ADB, he had worked with Barclays Bank Ghana Limited (2007 to 2014) and SDC Group (Discount & Brokerage Services) from 2006 to 2007 and Ferkos Ferramenta.
Gideon Amonortey Otu holds a Bachelor of Management Studies from the University 
of Cape Coast, and an MBA in Banking and Finance from Paris Graduate School of Management. He is also a certified Lead Implementer in the Quality Management Systems (ISO 9001: 2015) and Information Security Management Systems (ISO 27001) and certified ISO 19011:2018 Internal Auditor.    
Alex Forson
Acting Head, E-BusinessMr. Alex Forson joined the Bank in 2001 as a Clerk with the Kumasi Adum Branch. In 2006, he was appointed as one of an eight-member Flexcube Team that undertook a project to migrate fifty-six (56) branches of the Bank which were then operating as manual stand-alone branches to the Bank’s maiden banking software, Flexcube.
He was then transferred to the Finance Department as an Accounts Clerk in 2009. A year 
later in 2010, he was reassigned as Operations Officer for Reconciliation and Settlement 
with the Transaction Banking and Technology Department, now E-Business Department.
In 2015, he was appointed as the Unit Head, Sales under the E-Business Department. He is currently the Acting Head of the E-Business Department. Alex has extensive knowledge and experience in Card Operations and Information Technology. He holds an International Executive Master of Business Administration (IEMBA) in Information Technology Management from the Paris Graduate School of Management (PGSM), France, and a Bachelor of Business Administration degree (Marketing) from the Methodist University College, Ghana. 
Daasebre Akuamoah 
Agyapong II 27         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements27
Esteemed Shareholders, Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,
I warmly welcome you to the Annual General Meeting. I once again deem it an honour 
to present to you, my statement on the key highlights of the events and experiences of the 2022 financial year and how they impacted the Bank. 
Before presenting to you the general performance of the Bank, kindly permit me to 
address you briefly on the significant global and national operating and economic environment of the financial year 2022.
The Operating and Economic EnvironmentThe year 2022 presented both opportunities and challenges for Ghana’s operating 
and economic environment. The Ghanaian economy witnessed a significant decline in the year 2022 as a result of a combination of economic factors including high prices of imported commodities such as petroleum products and grains, soaring inflation and interest rates, and a significant depreciation of the Ghana Cedi.
Real GDP growth slowed to 3.3% in 2022 from 5.4% in 2021 due largely to the above-
referenced macroeconomic instability, global financial tightening, and spillover effects of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. Inflation was an estimated 31.5% in 2022, up from 10% in 2021, driven by food and energy prices and the depreciating local currency. The Bank of Ghana tightened monetary policy; the policy rate was hiked to 27% in 2022 from 14.5% in 2021. The fiscal deficit widened slightly to 9.3% of GDP from 9.2% in 2021 due to higher spending. Public debt hit 93.5% of GDP in 2022, up from 82.0% in 2021, driven by fiscal deficits and exchange rate depreciation. The current account deficit narrowed to 2.8% of GDP from 3.2%, driven by an improved trade balance. Foreign exchange reserves declined to $6.2 billion in 2022 (2.9 months of import cover) from $9.7 billion in 2021 (6.9 months).
Deposit rates, including demand deposits, savings deposits, and time deposits 
remained relatively stable with minor variations. However, time deposit rates showed slight fluctuations, with the 3-month rate ranging from 11.50% to 14.00% and the 6-month rate ranging from 10.00% to 14.25% in 2022.
In the credit market, the average lending rate increased from 21.61% to 31.66% over 
the period, reflecting the impact of changes in interest rates on borrowers. The Ghana Reference Rate, which is used as a basis for determining lending rates, also exhibited an upward trend from 14.50% to 25.76% during the year 2022.
In the domestic currency market, the Ghana Cedi came under immense pressure 
in 2022 due to sovereign downgrades by sovereign credit rating agencies such as Standard & Poor’s, Moody’s, and Fitch leading to lack of access to the international markets, and portfolio reversals as the US Fed tightened policy alongside heightened foreign exchange demand pressures.
In October 2022, the currency depreciated steeply, on the back of negative sentiments 
surrounding the Domestic Debt Exchange Programme (DDEP). The Ghana Cedi, however, recovered sharply in December 2022, as the country reached a Staff Level Agreement with the IMF, amid tightening monetary policy which somewhat reduced the Ghana Cedi liquidity and the marginal weakness of the US dollar as inflation peaked in the US.
Cumulatively, on the interbank market, the Ghana Cedi depreciated by 53.8%, 45.5% 
and 46.8% against the US Dollar, the Pound Sterling and the Euro, respectively. This compared with an appreciation of 3.5 percent against the Euro and a depreciation of Daasebre Akuamoah 
Agyapong II CHAIRMAN’S 
STATEMENTREPORTS
2The Peopleʼs Bank2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements284.1 percent, and 3.1 percent against the US Dollar and the 
Pound Sterling respectively in 2021.
Performance of the Banking Industry in 2022Highlights of the End-of-Year 2022 Audited Financial 
Statements of Banks
The end-of-2022 audited financial statements of banks 
mirrored the impact of the challenging economic environment that prevailed in the year, especially with the introduction of the DDEP.
Across the banking industry, significant losses were 
recorded by most banks. This resulted in an industry loss of approximately GHS 8 billion at the end of the year under review, relative to a profit of GHS 7.4 billion within the same period in 2021. Owing to the losses recorded across the industry, key profitability indicators such as Return-on-Equity and Return-on-Assets registered negative numbers in 2022. Capital Adequacy Ratios (CARs) of banks in the industry decreased although the values were, for the most, part, still above the 10% regulatory minimum. In December 2022, the average CAR in the industry was 16.2% (after adjustment for regulatory reliefs), compared with 19.6% for the same period in 2021.
Notwithstanding the above, industry total assets grew by 
18.3%, recording GHS 212 billion by the end of December 2022.  Accordingly, as regards total industry deposits, a significant increase of 30.5% was recorded at the end of 2022 compared with 16.6% growth the previous year. Thus, total deposits in the industry culminated in GHS 165.6 billion at the end of 2022.
Total credit also grew by 26% to GHS 59.6 billion from 
GHS 47.3 billion in December 2021. On the other hand, total industry investments contracted by 17.9% at the end of 2022 relative to the 29.0% growth recorded in the previous year. Total investments by the end of 2022 were worth GHS 69.5 billion, a significant decline from GHS 84.6 billion in December 2021. With industry-wide weakened asset quality, the Non-Performing Loan (NPL) ratio reflected higher loan impairments in comparison with loan stock growth. The industry NPL ratio stood at 18.4% in December 2022 from 15.9% in December 2021.
Performance of ADBThe Bank recorded a Loss after tax of GHS (371milllion) 
compared to a Profit after Tax of GHS GHS81.6million in the previous year. The loss recorded was mainly as a result of impairment on other financial assets, specifically the DDEP and loans. This resulted in a decline in the Return on Equity and Return on Assets to (56.41%) and (5.01%) respectively, as against 8.7 and 1.26 respectively of the previous year.
The size of the Balance Sheet grew over the year 
from GHS6.5 billion in 2021 to GHS7.4 billion in 2022, representing 14.9% growth.The Non-Performing Loan portfolio of the Bank witnessed a reduction from 31.21% to 29.74%. The objective of the Bank however is to significantly reduce the NPL ratio to attain the industry brackets by the end of 2024. Deposits grew by 19% from GHS4.9 billion to GHS 5.9 billion. At the end of 2022, the CAR was 7.3%, which was below the regulatory minimum of 10%.
DDEP ChallengesThe Government of Ghana as part of its agenda to 
streamline and improve the economy as well as increase the country’s capacity to service public debts at sustainable levels launched Ghana’s Domestic Debt Exchange programme on December 5, 2022. The purpose of the programme was an invitation to individual and corporate bondholders for the voluntary exchange of approximately GHS137 billion of the domestic notes and bonds of the Republic, including E.S.L.A. and Daakye bonds, for a package of new bonds to be issued by the Republic. The DDEP excluded Treasury Bills in totality, and notes and bonds held by individuals (natural persons).
The participation of the Bank in the DDEP resulted in direct 
and indirect additional impairment on bonds held by the Bank amounting to a total amount of GHS375million. This negatively impacted the CAR of the Bank from 14.49% in the previous year to 3.6%.
As part of measures to mitigate the impact of the DDEP on 
the banking sector, the Bank of Ghana issued a directive on January 5, 2023 to all banks to “suspend the declaration and payment of dividends and other distributions to shareholders, effective December 31, 2022 until further notice.
Notwithstanding the economic challenges and its negative 
effect on the financial sector, I would like to assure shareholders, on behalf of the Board of Directors and Executive Management, that we are putting in place adequate measures through a two-year strategic plan adopted at the beginning of 2023 to ensure sustainability, growth, and profitability of the Bank.
In this regard, the Board of Directors is working on a capital 
restoration plan that will restore the CAR of the Bank to the regulatory minimum as soon as possible. Engagements with shareholders will commence once the proposal has been reviewed and approved by the Board of Directors.
Corporate GovernanceADB PLC places high premium on the value of sound 
corporate governance as an important factor for efficiency, competitiveness, sustainable business growth and performance. The Board therefore strives to implement the highest standards of corporate governance principles to achieve transparency and accountability for the benefit of all its stakeholders. To stay up to date with dynamic trends and emerging risk in the banking industry, the directors underwent the annual corporate governance certification 29         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements29training which was organised by the National Banking 
College. Details of the training received by the directors have been included under the disclosure portions of this report
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)As part of our commitment to ensuring growth in the 
agricultural sector as well as contribute to the wider stakeholder community, the Bank engaged in some CSR projects to promote and enhance the socio economic development of our communities of operation and the country as a whole. In this regard, the Bank spent an amount of GHS3million on corporate social responsibility. This included the National Best Farmer sponsorship, donations to schools and others of national interest.
ConclusionOn behalf of the Board of Directors, I would like to express 
our sincere appreciation to all our stakeholders, especially our shareholders, customers, the Government of Ghana, the Ministry of Food and Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance, State Interest and Governance Authority and the Bank of Ghana for your continuous support over the years. We are thankful for your loyalty and patience. We are confident in the Bank’s prospects and would like to assure you that we are making every effort to remain steadfast on our path to full recovery.
Thank you for the opportunity of serving you.
Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II
Board Chairman
2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements30Alhassan 
Yakubu-TaliMANAGING 
DIRECTOR’S REPORTREPORTS
Dear Shareholders:
It is an honour and privilege to welcome you to the Annual General Meeting for the 
2022 financial year. This meeting is particularly meaningful to me, as it is my first as the Managing Director of the Agricultural Development Bank, Plc. It is also worth acknowledging once again, the warm reception I have received from colleagues, the Board, customers, and shareholders since my appointment.
I also want to express my sincere gratitude to Dr. John Kofi Mensah, who was 
the Managing Director until 1st December, 2022 when I took over. The current Management team is grateful for his leadership and contributions to the Bank.
1.0  FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
In 2022, the Bank reported a loss of GHS 371million. This was a substantial deviation from the trend of modest profitability which the Bank had recorded since 2017. 
The 2022 financial performance was a reflection of the impact of what turned out to 
be a challenging year for the Ghanaian economy.
The economy witnessed a steeper than expected depreciation of the Ghana Cedi, 
triggering an elevated inflation. The implementation of the Domestic Debt Exchange Program(DDEP) resulted in lack of market liquidity for Government of Ghana Bonds. These significant unfavourable events during the year under review had not only an adverse effect on ADB’s financial performance for 2022, but also, repercussions for the future.
Another impact of the DDEP was the erosion of our capital base which made our 
Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) to fall below the regulatory minimum threshold of 10%. We thus require urgent additional capital injection to restore the CAR to at least the regulatory minimum. I am aware that the Board of Directors is carefully considering all options and will in due time, engage the shareholders on the way forward.
As disclosed earlier, our results included GHS 375 million of revenue mark-to-market 
losses on assets held in Government bonds and Cocoa Bills. In addition, like most other banks, we experienced elevated credit losses because some of our customers struggled to repay their loans. As credit quality deteriorated, we added to loan loss reserves. Our 2022 results reflect a net build of GHS 49 million to our loan loss reserves. We ended the year with total loan loss reserves of GHS 512 million.
Notwistanding, the above performance our brand remains strong and our customers 
remain loyal to ADB around the country. Furthermore, we have initiated comprehensive corrective measures in the areas concerned. We will build on this to achieve our highest priority, which is returning ADB to sustainable profitability within the shortest possible time.
2  OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE
As the People’s Bank, at the heart of our operations lies an unwavering 
commitment to our cherished customers and stakeholders and we seek to go 
2The Peopleʼs Bank31         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements31above and beyond the norm with a determination to 
harness the transformational power of agribusiness for wealth creation.
During the review period, the Bank added the 
Takoradi-Market Circle Branch to its branch network moving the total retail outlets to 87 across the country. The Bank has presence in all the 16 regions of Ghana and will seek to increase its numbers in the years ahead as part of making banking services available to all.
2.1  Leveraging technology to enhance Electronic and Retail Banking
“The Bank is leveraging technology towards improving its digital and retail banking segments in order to enhance convenience and service delivery.”
As part of our transformational agenda, the Bank is 
leveraging technology towards improving its digital and retail banking segments in order to enhance convenience and service delivery. We made significant strides in the E-business space, by providing payment solutions that are safe and secure and providing convenience to our customers.
The Bank in the year 2022 upgraded its Internet Banking 
platform to the latest version which allows customers to make intra-bank and inter-bank funds transfers, bills payment, and performance of bulk uploads, among others.
To meet customer expectations and to improve the 
turnaround time on card issuance and delivery, the Bank completed its project on Instant Card Issuance on the GHLink cards. This enables customers who request GHLink cards to receive cards within 10 minutes upon card request. This has been deployed at twenty-nine (29) of our branches across the country. There is an ongoing project to replicate same for the instant Issuance of Visa Cards which is expected to be completed by the end of July 2023.
As part of the Bank’s strategy in making strides towards 
a cash-lite system, the Bank hooked onto the Ghanapay Gateway (“Ghanapay”). Ghanapay is like any mobile money service but with additional banking services designed for financial freedom.
To improve turnaround time at teller points in our branches, 
the Bank has also started the piloting of a paperless deposit project at some selected branches.
The Board of Directors has also granted approval for the 
Bank to join the Pan African Payment and Settlement System (PAPSS). PAPSS is a cross-border, financial market infrastructure enabling payment transactions across Africa. The project is ongoing and expected to be completed in September 2023.2.2  Integrated Management Systems
The Bank progressively implemented four (4) management systems in 2020 and 2021. For 2022, the Bank consciously took measures to embed the requirements of the management systems into the Bank’s daily operational processes. Regarding the card environment, the Bank attained a Compliant Status for the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCIDSS).
Management and the Board are committed to creating a 
robust banking environment, offering improved service quality, and providing optimal comfort and convenience to our customers, while efficiently managing the risks that the financial sector, especially the banking industry faces daily.
2.3  Agribusiness Financing
“Our corporate tagline, truly agric and more, is reflective of our core mandate which has positioned us as the leader in agribusiness financing for wealth creation across the entire agricultural value chain”.
The Bank continued its focus on financing critical activities 
in the agricultural sector in 2022 with emphasis on providing a market for primary producers and raw materials for vital industries in the country leading to a significant growth in the agricultural portfolio. This was in line with the Bank’s objective to substantially increase the share of the agricultural loan portfolio in the Bank’s total loan portfolio. Our corporate tagline, truly agric and more, is reflective of our core mandate which has positioned us as the leader in agribusiness financing for wealth creation across the entire agricultural value chain”.
The Bank provided loans to meet the working capital and 
capital expenditure needs of players in the Agricultural Value Chain. Animal and crop farmers, aggregators/stockists, agro-processors, agro-marketers, and input distributors were supported in 2022.
The Bank in 2022 continued to be an active partner for 
the implementation of the One-District-One-Factory Programme (1D1F). As of year-end 2022, the Bank had approved a total of GHS156.89 million in respect of twenty-one viable projects to undertake among others, broiler production and processing, fruit processing, general manufacturing, construction, jute bags production as well as fish farming and processing. 
Having identified inadequate raw material supply as the 
bane of many processing concerns in the country, the Bank, in 2022 took deliberate steps to support the production of raw materials to support some 1D1F Projects. Approvals amounting to GHS154.0 million were made to support the production of fruits, especially citrus and pineapple and to meet other needs of the processing concerns. 2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements32The Bank continues to partner risk-sharing incentive entities 
like the Ghana Incentive-Based Risk Sharing System for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) to reduce the Bank’s risk burden as we seek to further grow our investments in the agricultural sector. The Bank was subsequently adjudged the winner of the 2022 Highest Value of Guaranteed Agricultural Credit Award by GIRSAL.
We are happy to report that the Bank’s agricultural sector 
loan portfolio hit over GHS1billion during the review period. This excludes non funded facilities such as letters of credit and guarantees granted for the purchase of agricultural inputs, machinery, equipment and raw materials.
This reaffirms our commitment to refocus the Bank to its 
original mandate of providing financial intermediation for the agricultural sector.
2.4  Sustainable Banking
Since 2019 when the Bank of Ghana introduced the Ghana Sustainable Banking Principles and directed all financial and non-financial institutions to implement and institutionalise tenets of the principles into their operations, the Board and Management of the Bank have made commitments to be responsible and ethical in leading efforts at addressing key environmental risk considerations, social inclusion, and good governance (ESG) into the Banks’ operations.
The ESG factors that are considered as key to the Bank’s 
operations include Climate Change and Environment, Diversity Equity and Inclusion, Human Capital Management (employee) and Customers. 
ADB PLC will exhibit continuous commitment by embarking 
on continuous awareness and sensitization programmes across its employees, shareholders, and customers on the need to prioritise ESG in the Bank’s operations for growth enhancement and increased returns.
3.  2023 AND BEYONDIn January 2023 and under the direction of the Board of 
Directors, we adopted a new Strategic Plan anchored on the theme “Going Above and Beyond the Predictable”. The main thrusts of the Strategic Plan include improved efficiencies in financial performance, risk management, regulatory compliance, the creation of a dynamic, efficient and effective technology-enabled processes for an improved customer service experience and the building of a talented and motivated workforce that is eager to embrace and achieve a unique purpose.
Consequently, we are working to build an ADB that offers 
our customers unmatched convenience, expertise, high-quality service and a variety of financial products and services delivered through multiple electronic channels.In order to accelerate our drive towards value creation for all our stakeholders, especially our shareholders, we have reorganised the credit risk, operations and other key functions to create a more streamlined organisation with greater accountability for performance. The new structure sets out a clear path to profitability and value creation.
To create value for our clients and shareholders, our 
resources will be allocated to activities that generate enough value for our clients and earn adequate risk-adjusted returns for shareholders. At the same time, we are streamlining the cost structure of the Bank to ensure an adoption of efficient information technology systems which support business growth.
Beyond the Bank’s need for capital injection from its 
shareholders to meet the pre-DDEP levels of capital, we strongly believe that in the midst of another major market transition and shift, the opportunity exists for ADB to be well capitalised to come out bigger, stronger, and more resilient to market shocks and become a larger bank that will be well positioned to support Government’s efforts to encourage manufacturing and agriculture on a large scale across the country.
4.  CONCLUSIONADB has a long history of managing successfully through 
economic and business challenges. I am confident that we will do so again. Our competitive advantage will remain our diverse customer base, which is rich in history through relationships built over years.
We remain determined to build a culture where talent is 
recognised and rewarded with opportunity, where each employee has a chance to achieve his/her potential, and where the better do best for an attractive future. This is very important as our ability to accomplish so much in such a short period will not be possible without the extraordinary perseverance, hard work, focus and professionalism of our staff.
Furthermore, this will give us a firm foundation from which 
to focus on our responsibilities to our customers, who continue to look to us as a dependable business partner and to our shareholders, to whom we expect to return value and finally, to the financial system, of which we are a part.
To the 1,482 staff members who intensely focused on 
creating a better experience for customers, responding in the best possible way to the unexpected, we appreciate you. To our customers for their trust, to the Board for their direction and to you, our shareholders, for your continued support, we say thank you.
REPORT OF THE AUDITOR33         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements33REPORT OF THE AUDITOR
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORTTO 
THE SHAREHOLDERS OF AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT BANK PLC
Report on the audit of the financial statements
Opinion 
We have audited the financial statements of the Agricultural 
Development Bank PLC (the Bank) set out on pages 38 to 101, which comprise the statement of financial position as at 31 December 2022, the statement of profit or loss, the statement of comprehensive income, the statement of changes in equity and the statement of cash flows for the year then ended, and notes to the financial statements, including a summary of significant accounting policies. 
In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in 
all material respects, the financial position of the Bank as at 31 December 2022, and its financial performance and cash flows for the year then ended in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and also in the manner required by the provisions of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) as well as the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).
Basis for Opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International 
Standards on Auditing (ISAs). Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors’  
Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of our report. We are independent of the company in accordance with the International Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants (including International Independence Standards) (IESBA Code) together with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of financial statements in Ghana, and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements and the IESBA Code. We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Key Audit Matters
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our 
professional judgement, were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period. These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole, and in forming our opinion thereon, and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters. For each matter below, our description of how our audit addressed the matter has been provided in that context.
We have fulfilled the responsibilities described in the 
Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report, including relating the audit to these matters. Accordingly, our audit included the performance of procedures designed to respond to our assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements. The result of our audit procedures, including the procedures performed to address the matters below, provide the basis for our audit opinion on the accompanying financial statements.INDEPENDENT 
AUDITOR’S REPORT
2The Peopleʼs Bank2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements34We have obtained an understanding of the Bank’s 
IFRS 9 provisioning process as well as the credit risk modelling methodology.
We validated and tested the ECL model of the Bank 
by assessing the data inputs and assumptions that are driving the model calculations.
We have also performed the following substantive 
audit procedures:
• We have reviewed and tested the methodology 
developed to calculate loan loss provision under IFRS 9, concentrating on aspects such as factors for determining a ‘significant increase in credit risk’, staging of loans, testing specific models related to Probability of Default (PD), Loss Given Default (LGD) and Exposure at Default (EAD). 
• We have recalculated ECL estimates, • The audit team has reviewed forward looking 
information / multiple economic scenario elements.
• For stage 3 exposures, we tested the 
reasonableness of the assumptions underlying the impairment identification and quantification including forecasts of future cash flows, valuation of underlying collateral, estimated period of realisation for collaterals, and others.
• We have also reviewed information relating to the 
allowance for expected credit losses on loans and advances to customers disclosed in the notes to the financial statements of the Bank.IFRS 9 introduced a forward-looking Expected Credit Loss (ECL) model. The ECL model is to reflect the general pattern of deterioration or improvement in the credit quality of financial instruments. The amount of ECL’s recognized as a loss allowance or provision depends on the extent of credit deterioration since the initial recognition. The recognition of impairment could be done on a 12-month expected credit losses or Lifetime expected credit losses. Impairment computations under IFRS 9 therefore involves the use of models that take into account:
• The probability-weighted outcome, and
• Reasonable and supportable information that is 
available without undue cost.
Significant judgements in the determination of the 
Bank’s Expected Credit Loss include:
• Use of assumptions in determining various ECL 
modelling parameters including probability of defaults and loss given defaults;
• Determination of a significant increase in credit 
risk and 
• Determination of associations between 
macroeconomic scenarios.
The use of different models and assumptions can significantly affect the level of allowance for expected credit losses on loans and advances to customers. Due to the significance of such loans which account for about 44% of total assets of the bank, and the significant use of judgements, assessment of allowance for expected credit losses has been identified as a key audit matter.
As disclosed in note 21 of the financial statements, 
an impairment loss of GHS512 is held against the loan  exposure.
Further disclosures relating to these amounts and 
the Bank’s accounting policies regarding estimating these ECLs have been disclosed in Note 5.4 and Note 21 respectively of these financial statements.Key Audit Matter How the matter was addressed in the audit
Allowance for expected credit losses on loans 
and advances to customers35         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements35  
 Key Audit Matter    
   How the matter was addressed in the audit  
  
 Expected Credit Loss (ECL) assessments on sovereign  
exposures (Government Bills and Bonds)  
  
 As disclosed in note 20 of the financial statements, 
the bank held material exposure to treasury bills (GHS 380,314) and bonds (GHS 1,277,414). 
In the year under review, government initiated a Debt 
Exchange Programme as part of a comprehensive agenda to restore debt and fiscal sustainability. This debt restructuring programme is critical component of both the debt reduction and the IMF programme that government has sought to help restore economic stability.  
The Bank applied IFRS9 model in determining the 
ECL impacts of the debt restructure programme on its exposure to these instruments. Management exercised significant judgements regarding inputs, assumptions, and techniques for estimating ECL and staging of these instruments. Key judgements and estimates include  
• fair value determination of the new bonds 
government announced as replacement for the bonds held at 31 December 2022,  
• Various scenarios and probability weights assigned to these scenarios as well as estimate of expected cash shortfalls under each of these scenarios 
• Assessment of Significant Increase in Credit Risk (SICR); and 
• Determination of whether the existing instruments would have suffered significant modification based on the terms of the restructure  
Further details of the debt restructuring programme and the company’s IFRS 9 assessment and related ECL impacts are disclosed in note 20 of these financial statements.       
We obtained and reviewed the communications from government regarding the debt restructuring programme.  We assessed IFRS 9 and other accounting implications of this debt restructuring programme.   
Together with our specialist teams, we reviewed 
critical inputs used in assessing ECL on these instruments including staging, fair value calculations, scenarios and related probability weights among others.   
We reviewed industry guidance issued by the Institute 
of Chartered Accountants Ghana (ICAG) regarding accounting implications of the debt restructure.   
We evaluated the reasonableness of management 
assumptions and judgments and tested the reasonableness of management’s ECL calculations.
We  also  reviewed  the reasonableness of the 
impairment in line with our understanding of the 
macroeconomic environment and the banking industry.   
We assessed the adequacy of the management’s 
disclosure regarding impairment of bond balances in line with IFRS 9 requirements.  2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements36Other Information
The Directors are responsible for the other information. The 
other information comprises the information included in the 117-page document titled “Agricultural Development Bank Plc, Annual Report and Financial Statements, 31 December 2022”, which includes the Report of Directors, and Other Disclosures as required by the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930). The other information does not include the financial statements and our Auditor’s report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover 
the other information and we do not express an audit opinion or any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements, 
our responsibility is to read the other information and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If, based on the work we have performed, we conclude that 
there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in this regard.
Responsibilities of the directors for the financial 
statements
The Directors are responsible for the preparation and fair 
presentation of the financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and the requirements of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) as well as the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930), and for such internal control as the Directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements, the Directors are 
responsible for assessing the Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend to liquidate the Bank or to cease operations, or have no realistic alternative but to do so. 
Those charged with governance are responsible for 
overseeing the Bank’s financial reporting processes.
Auditors’ responsibilities for the audit of the 
financial statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about 
whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an Auditor’s report that includes our opinion. Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
As part of an audit in accordance with ISAs, we exercise 
professional judgement and maintain professional 
skepticism throughout the audit. We also:
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement 
of the financial statements, whether due to fraud or error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the override of internal control.
• Obtain an understanding of internal controls relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Bank’s internal control.
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related disclosures made by the Directors.
• Conclude on the appropriateness of the Directors’ use of the going concern basis of accounting and based on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on the Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern. If we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are required to draw attention in our Auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the financial statements or, if such disclosures are inadequate, to modify our opinion. Our conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of our Auditor’s report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Bank to cease to continue as a going concern.
• Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the financial statements, including the disclosures, and whether the financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that achieves fair presentation.
• Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the financial information of the entities or business activities within the bank to express an opinion on the financial statements. We are responsible for the direction, supervision and performance of the Bank’s audit. We remain solely responsible for our audit opinion.
We communicate with the Directors regarding, among 
other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal controls that we identify during our audit.37         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements37We also provide the Directors with a statement that 
we have complied with relevant ethical requirements regarding independence, and to communicate with them all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on our independence, and where applicable, related safeguards.
From the matters communicated with the Directors, we 
determine those matters that were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and are therefore the key audit matters. We describe these matters in our Auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, in extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a matter should not be communicated in our report because the adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication.
Report on other legal requirements
The Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) requires that in carrying out our audit we consider and report on the 
following matters.  We confirm that:
• We have obtained all the information and explanations 
which to the best of our knowledge and belief were necessary for the purposes of our audit.
• In our opinion, proper books of account have been kept by the Bank, so far as appears from our examination of those books; 
• The statement of financial position, the statement of profit and loss and the statement of comprehensive income are in agreement with the books of account and returns.
• The statement of financial position, the statement of profit and loss and the statement of comprehensive income are in agreement with the books of account and returns.
• In our opinion, to the best of our information and according to the explanations given to us, the accounts give the information required under the Act, in the manner so required and give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company at the end of the financial year and of the profit or loss for the financial year then ended.
• We are independent of the Bank pursuant to Section 143 of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992).
The Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions 
Act, 2016 (Act 930) under Section 85(2) requires that we state certain matters in our audit report. Accordingly, we 
state that;
• The accounts give a true and fair view of the statement 
of affairs of the Bank and the results of operations for the year under review.
• We were able to obtain all the information and explanations required for the efficient performance of our duties.
• The transactions of the Bank are generally within the powers of the Bank;
• The Bank has generally complied with the provisions of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) except as disclosed in note 22 and 46(ii) of these financial statements.
• The Bank has generally complied with the provisions 
of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2008 (Act 749), the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2008 (Act 762) and regulations made under these enactments.
The Engagement Partner on the audit resulting in this independent Auditors’ report is Emmanuel Adekahlor (ICAG/P/1596).
Ernst & Young (ICAG/F/2022/126)
Chartered AccountantsAccra, Ghana
Date: 30th April, 2023
2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements38STATEMENT OF PROFIT
OR LOSS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2022
2022 2021
 Note  GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Interest income 7b          892,367        728,235 
Interest expense 8          (470,049)       (247,909)
Net interest income 422,318        480,326 
Fees and commission income 9           113,710        101,319 
Fees and commission expense 9           (17,931)         (10,116)
Net fees and commission income            95,779          91,203 
Net trading income 10           122,854          55,874 
Other operating income 11              6,745          12,412 
Operating Income           647,696        639,815 
Impairment loss on financial assets 12           (55,064)         (41,781)
Impairment loss-  other financial assets 12          (375,148) -
Personnel expenses 13          (336,029)       (250,281)
Other operating expenses 14          (187,431)       (154,710)
Depreciation and amortization 15           (58,382)         (66,946)
(Loss)/Profit before tax (364,358)        126,097 
Income tax expense 24           (6,922)         (44,495)
(Loss)/Profit after tax (371,280)          81,602 2The Peopleʼs Bank39         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements39Note 2022 2021
 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
(Loss)/Profit after tax (371,280) 81,602
Other comprehensive income, net of tax of Items that will not 
be reclassified to profit or loss:
Fair value through Other Comprehensive Income 39(i) 26,062 6,030 
Revaluation Surplus (Net of Tax) 24.4, 36 65,153 -
Other comprehensive income for the year 91,215 6,030 
Total comprehensive income for the year (280,065) 87,632
Earnings per shareBasic earnings per share (in Ghana pesewas) 16 (107.0)            23.52 
Diluted earnings per share (in Ghana pesewas) 16 (107.0)            23.52 
The notes on pages 44 to 101 form an integral part of these financial statements.STATEMENT OF 
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 20222The Peopleʼs Bank2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements40
STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL 
POSITION AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2022
2022 2021
Assets Note  GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cash and bank balances 17 1,908,837 924,619
Due from other banks 18 349,719 346,219
Investment securities 20 1,316,584 2,400,655
Loans and advances to customers 21 3,242,189 2,282,312
Investment (other than securities) 22 134,729 99,926
Corporate tax assets 24            10,851                 -   
Intangible assets 25 20,092 28,032
Other assets 26 63,918 52,253
Property and equipment 27 216,332 113,735
Right of use assets 28 110,923 150,555
Deferred tax assets 24.4 38,546 55,813
Total Assets 7,412,720 6,454,119
Liabilities
Borrowed funds 30 588,438 294,559
Deposits from customers 31 5,864,851 4,927,216
Corporate tax liability 24.2 0      35,273
Other liabilities 32 151,614 95,996
Lease Liability (IFRS 16) 33 149,627 162,820
6,754,530 5,515,864
EquityStated capital 34 698,700 698,700
Accumulated losses 35 (674,978) (236,645)
Revaluation reserve 36 122,684 57,531
Statutory reserve 37 182,015 182,015
Credit risk reserve 38 245,352 178,298
Fair value through OCI 39
84,417 58,356
Shareholders’ funds 658,190 938,255
Total liabilities and Shareholders’ Funds 7,412,720 6,454,119
The notes on pages  44 to 101 form an integral part of these financial statements
These financial statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 30 April 2023 and signed on its behalf by:
CHAIRMAN                                                                                                                                                     DIRECT OR2The Peopleʼs Bank41         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements41STATEMENT OF 
CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 20222The Peopleʼs Bank
In thousands 
of GH¢  Stated CapitalCredit Risk 
ReserveStatutory 
Reserve Revaluation 
Reserve Other 
ReservesRetained 
EarningsTotal
Balance at 1 January 2022698,700 178,298 182,015 57,531 58,355 (236,644) 938,255
Profit for the year - - - - -(371,280) (371,280)
Other Comprehensive Income net of tax
Revaluation Surplus (net 
of tax)65,153 65,153
Net Change in fair value of Equity Investments- - - - 26,062 - 26,062
Transfer from retained earnings to statutory reserve - - - - -
--
Transfer to (from) credit risk reserve
- 67,054 - - -(67,054) -
Balance at 31 December 2022698,700 245,352 182,015 122,684 84,417 (674,978) 658,190
 2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements42STATEMENT OF CHANGES 
IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2022
In thousands of 
GH¢  Stated Capital Credit Risk 
ReserveStatutory 
Reserve Revaluation 
Reserve  Other 
ReservesRetained 
EarningsTotal
Balance at 1 January 2021698,700        153,088   141,214         57,531        52,325 (252,235) 850,623 
Additional Capital   -   -  -  -  -  -               -   
Transaction costs related to Right Issue                  -                   -              -                  -                -                 -                 -   
Profit for the year                  -                   -              -                  -                -   81,602 81,602 
  -   -  -  -  -  -               -   
Other Comprehensive Income net of tax  -   -  -  -  -  -               -   
Net Change in fair value of Equity Investments                 -                   -              -                  -           6,030               -   6,030 
Transfer from retained earnings to statutory reserve                  -            25,210            -                  -                -   (25,210)               -   
Transfer (from) credit risk reserve
            -               -   40,801             -               -   (40,801)               -   
Balance at 31 December 2021698,700 178,298 182,015 57,531 58,355 (236,644) 938,255 2The Peopleʼs Bank STATEMENT OF CHANGES 
IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 20222The Peopleʼs Bank STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 20222The Peopleʼs Bank43         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements432The Peopleʼs BankSTATEMENT OF CASH 
FLOWS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2022
Note 2022 2021
 GH¢'000  GH¢'000 
Cash flows from operating activities
(Loss)/Profit before tax (364,358) 126,097
Adjustment for non-cash items 48 116,931 (371,864)
(Loss) before working capital changes (247,427) (245,767)
Changes in operating assets and liabilities (9,847) 278,645
Interest Income received 809,876 650,811
Interest expense paid (446,512) (240,656)
Income Tax Paid 24.2 (66,183) (20,893)
Net cash generated from operating activities 39,907 422,140
Cash flows from investing activitiesPurchase of property and equipment (31,203) (32,789)
Purchase  of medium and long term government 
securities(1,779,215) (10,067,284)
Redemption of medium and long term government securities2,418,895 9,447,737
Proceeds from the sale of property and equipment 27 19 270
Payments of right of use assets 28 (5,288) (5,196)
Purchase of intangible assets 25 (2,070) (2,764)
Net cash used in investing activities 601,138 (660,025)
Cash flows from financing activities
Payments in borrowed funds (12,444,639) (641,191)
Receipts in borrowed funds 30 12,727,351 (20,502)
Payments of Principal portion of Lease liability (58,112) 618,764
Net cash generated from financing activities 224,600 (42,929)
Increase in cash and cash equivalents 865,645 (280,815)
Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January 1,111,677 1,392,493
Effect of exchange rate fluctuation on cash held 6,210 -
Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December
29 1,983,532 1,111,677
The notes on pages 44 to 101 form an integral part of these financial statements2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements44NOTES TO THE 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 31 DECEMBER 2022
1. REPORTING ENTITY
Agricultural Development Bank Plc (ADB) is a financial 
institution incorporated in Ghana.  The registered office and address of the Bank is Accra Financial Centre, 3rd Ambassadorial Development Area. The Bank is primarily involved in corporate banking, investment banking and retail banking. These financial statements are for an individual entity.
The Bank is listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange.
2. BASIS OF ACCOUNTING AND CHANGES IN 
ACCOUNTING POLICIES
 a. Basis of preparation  
 
 The financial statements have been prepared on 
a historical cost basis  and equity instruments at fair value through  other comprehensive income (FVOCI) all of which have been measured at fair value. 
 These financial statements are presented in Ghana Cedi, which is the Bank’s functional currency. All amounts have been rounded to the nearest thousands including amounts disclosed  in the naratives, except when otherwise indicated.
 
 b. Statement of compliance
 The financial statements have been prepared in 
accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as issued by the International Accounting Standard Board (IASB) and in the manner required by the Companies Act 2019, (Act 992), and the Banks and Specialised Deposit–Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).
2.1. Changes in accounting policies and disclosures
Interest Rate Benchmark Reform (“IBOR reform”)
 Interest Rate Benchmark Reform Reform Phase 2 provides temporary reliefs to address the accounting issues which arise upon the replacement of an InterBank Offered Rate (an IBOR) with an alternative nearly risk-free interest rate (an RFR). For the purposes of these financial statements, the bank does not have any exposures to IBORs that are subject to reform and therefore the amendments had no impact.
2.2. New and amended standards and interpretations  
       issued but not yet effective
 The new and amended standards and interpretations that are issued, but not yet effective, up to the date of issuance of the Bank’s   financial statements are disclosed below. The Bank intends to adopt these standards, if applicable, when they become effective. Amendments to IAS 1: Classification of Liabilities as Current or Non-current
    In January 2020, the IASB issued amendments 
to paragraphs 69 to 76 of IAS 1 to specify the requirements for classifying liabilities as current or non-current. The amendments clarify:
• What is meant by a right to defer settlement
• That a right to defer must exist at the end of the reporting period
• That classification is unaffected by the likelihood that an entity will exercise its deferral right
• That only if an embedded derivative in a convertible liability is itself an equity instrument would the terms of a liability not impact its classification
 The amendments are effective for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023 and must be applied retrospectively. The Bank is currently assessing the impact the amendments will have on current practice and whether existing loan agreements may require renegotiation.
Reference to the Conceptual Framework – 
Amendments to IFRS 3
 In May 2020, the IASB issued Amendments to 
IFRS 3 Business Combinations - Reference to the Conceptual Framework. The amendments are intended to replace a reference to the Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements, issued in 1989, with a reference to the Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting issued in March 2018 without significantly changing its requirements.
 The Board also added an exception to the recognition principle of IFRS 3 to avoid the issue of potential ‘day 2’ gains or losses arising for liabilities and contingent liabilities that would be within the scope of IAS 37 or IFRIC 21 Levies, if incurred separately.
 At the same time, the Board decided to clarify existing guidance in IFRS 3 for contingent assets that would not be affected by replacing the reference to the Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements.
 The amendments are effective for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022 and apply prospectively.2The Peopleʼs Bank45         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements45Property, Plant and Equipment: Proceeds before 
Intended Use – Amendments to IAS 16
In May 2020, the IASB issued Property, Plant and 
Equipment - Proceeds before Intended Use, which prohibits entities deducting from the cost of an item of property, plant and equipment, any proceeds from selling items produced while bringing that asset to the location and condition necessary for it to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management. Instead, an entity recognises the proceeds from selling such items, and the costs of producing those items, in profit or loss.
The amendment is effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022 and must be applied retrospectively to items of property, plant and equipment made available for use on or after the beginning of the earliest period presented when the entity first applies the amendment.
The amendments are not expected to have a material 
impact on the Bank.
Onerous Contracts – Costs of Fulfilling a 
Contract – Amendments to IAS 37
In May 2020, the IASB issued amendments to IAS 
37 to specify which costs an entity needs to include when assessing whether a contract is onerous or loss-making.
The amendments apply a “directly related cost 
approach”. The costs that relate directly to a contract to provide goods or services include both incremental costs and an allocation of costs directly related to contract activities. General and administrative costs do not relate directly to a contract and are excluded unless they are explicitly chargeable to the counterparty under the contract.
The amendments are effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022. The Bank will apply these amendments to contracts for which it has not yet fulfilled all its obligations at the beginning of the annual reporting period in which it first applies the amendments.
IFRS 1 First-time Adoption of International 
Financial Reporting Standards  – Subsidiary as a 
first-time adopter
As part of its 2018-2020 annual improvements to IFRS 
standards process, the IASB issued an amendment to IFRS 1 First-time Adoption of International Financial Reporting Standards. The amendment permits a subsidiary that elects to apply paragraph D16(a) of IFRS 1 to measure cumulative translation differences using the amounts reported by the parent, based on the parent’s date of transition to IFRS. This amendment is also applied to an associate or joint venture that elects to apply paragraph D16(a) of IFRS 1.
The amendment is effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022 with earlier adoption permitted.IFRS 9 Financial Instruments – Fees in the ’10 per cent’ test for derecognition of financial liabilities
As part of its 2018-2020 annual improvements to 
IFRS standards process the IASB issued amendment to IFRS 9. The amendment clarifies the fees that an entity includes when assessing whether the terms of a new or modified financial liability are substantially different from the terms of the original financial liability. These fees include only those paid or received between the borrower and the lender, including fees paid or received by either the borrower or lender on the other’s behalf. An entity applies the amendment to financial liabilities that are modified or exchanged on or after the beginning of the annual reporting period in which the entity first applies the amendment.
The amendment is effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022 with earlier adoption permitted. The Bank will apply the amendments to financial liabilities that are modified or exchanged on or after the beginning of the annual reporting period in which the entity first applies the amendment.
The amendments are not expected to have a material 
impact on the Bank.
IAS 41 Agriculture – Taxation in fair value 
measurements
As part of its 2018-2020 annual improvements to 
IFRS standards process the IASB issued amendment to IAS 41 Agriculture . The amendment removes the 
requirement in paragraph 22 of IAS 41 that entities exclude cash flows for taxation when measuring the fair value of assets within the scope of IAS 41.
An entity applies the amendment prospectively to fair 
value measurements on or after the beginning of the first annual reporting period beginning on or after 1 January 2022 with earlier adoption permitted.
The amendments are not expected to have a material 
impact on the Bank.
IFRS 17 – Insurance Contracts
In May 2017, the IASB issued IFRS 17 Insurance 
Contracts (IFRS 17), a comprehensive new accounting standard for insurance contracts covering recognition and measurement, presentation and disclosure. Once effective, IFRS 17 will replace IFRS 4 Insurance Contracts (IFRS 4) that was issued in 2005. IFRS 17 applies to all types of insurance contracts (i.e., life, non-life, direct insurance and re-insurance), regardless of the type of entities that issue them, as well as to certain guarantees and financial instruments with discretionary participation features. A few scope exceptions will apply. IFRS 17 introduces new accounting requirement for banking products with insurance features that may affect the determination of which instruments or which components thereof will be in the scope of IFRS 9 or IFRS 17.
Loan contracts that meet the definition of insurance but limit the compensation for insured events to the amount otherwise required to settle the policyholder’s 2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements46obligation created by the contract: Issuers of such 
loans – e.g. a loan with waiver on death – have an option to apply IFRS 9 or IFRS 17. The election would be made at a portfolio level and would be irrevocable.
IFRS 17 is effective for reporting periods beginning 
on or after 1 January 2023, with comparative figures required. Early application is permitted, provided the entity also applies IFRS 9 and IFRS 15 on or before the date it first applies IFRS 17.
The Bank is currently in the process of assessing the 
impact of adopting IFRS 17 on its financial statements.
Definition of Accounting Estimates - 
Amendments to IAS 8
In February 2021, the IASB issued amendments 
to IAS 8, in which it introduces a definition of ‘accounting estimates. The amendments clarify the distinction between changes in accounting estimates and changes in accounting policies and the correction of errors. Also, they clarify how entities use measurement techniques and inputs to develop accounting estimates.
The amendments are effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023 and apply to changes in accounting policies and changes in accounting estimates that occur on or after the start of that period. Earlier application is permitted as long as this fact is disclosed.The amendments are 
not expected to have a material impact on the Bank.
Disclosure of Accounting Policies - Amendments 
to IAS 1 and IFRS Practice Statement 2
In February 2021, the IASB issued amendments 
to IAS 1 and IFRS Practice Statement 2 Making Materiality Judgements, in which it provides guidance and examples to help entities apply materiality judgements to accounting policy disclosures. The amendments aim to help entities provide accounting policy disclosures that are more useful by replacing the requirement for entities to disclose their ‘significant’ accounting policies with a requirement to disclose their ‘material’ accounting policies and adding guidance on how entities apply the concept of materiality in making decisions about accounting policy disclosures.
The amendments to IAS 1 are applicable for annual 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023 with earlier application permitted. Since the amendments to the Practice Statement 2 provide non-mandatory guidance on the application of the definition of material to accounting policy information, an effective date for these amendments is not necessary.
3.   SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING                                    POLICIES
The Bank is currently assessing the impact of the 
amendments to determine the impact they will have 
on the Bank’s accounting policy disclosures.The following are the principal accounting policies 
adopted by the company in the preparation of these financial statements.
These accounting policies have been applied 
consistently in dealing with items that are considered to be material to the Company’s
The Bank has consistently applied the following 
accounting policies to all periods presented in these financial statements.
Set out below is an index of the significant accounting 
policies, the details of which are available on the 
pages that follow.
a. Foreign currency transaction
b. Interest income and expense
c. Fee and commission
d. Net trading income
e. Dividend income
f. Leases
g. Income tax
h. Financial assets and financial liabilities
i. Fair value measurement
j. Cash and cash equivalents
k. Investment securities
l. Property and equipment
m. Intangible assets 
n. Impairment of non-financial assets
o. Deposits and due to other banks
p. Provisions
q. Financial guarantees and loan commitments
r. Fiduciary activities
s. Employee benefits
t. Stated capital and reserves 
u. Earnings per share
v. Investment in associates
w. Operating segments
a. Foreign Currency Transaction
Transactions in foreign currencies are translated into the functional currency using exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions.  Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are re-translated at closing inter-bank mid rates ruling at the reporting date.  Non-monetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated at exchange rates ruling at the dates of initial recognition.  Non-monetary items denominated in a foreign currency that are measured at fair value are translated at exchange rates ruling at the date when fair value was determined.47         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements47Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from 
the settlement of foreign currency transactions and from re-translation at year-end exchange rates of foreign currency denominated monetary assets and liabilities are recognized in profit or loss, except for differences on translation of equity investments in respect of which an election has been made to present subsequent changes in fair value and differences arising on translation of equity investments in other comprehensive income.
All foreign exchange gains and losses recognized in 
profit or loss are presented net within the corresponding item. Foreign exchange gains and losses on other comprehensive income items are presented in other comprehensive income within the corresponding item.
These financial statements are presented in Ghana 
Cedi, which is the Bank’s functional currency. All amounts have been rounded to the nearest thousands, except when otherwise indicated.
b.   Interest Income and Expense
Interest income and expense for all interest-bearing financial instruments are recognised within ‘interest income’ and ‘interest expense’ in profit or loss using the effective interest method.
The effective interest method is a method of 
calculating the amortised cost of a financial asset or a financial liability and allocating interest income or interest expense over the relevant period.  The effective interest rate is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash payments or receipts through the expected life of the financial instrument or, when appropriate, a shorter period to the net carrying amount of the financial asset or financial liability.  When calculating the effective interest rate, the Bank estimates cash flows considering all contractual terms of the financial instrument, including prepayment options, but does not consider future credit losses. 
The calculation includes all fees and points paid or 
received between parties to the contract that are an integral part of the effective interest rate, transaction costs and all other premiums or discounts.
c. Fees and CommissionsFee and commission income and expense that are integral to the effective interest rate on afinancial asset or financial liability are included in the effective interest rate . Other fee and commission income – including account servicing fees, investment management fees, sales commission, placement fees and syndication fees – is recognised as the related services are performed. If a loan commitment is not expected to result in the draw-down of a loan, then the related loan commitment fee is recognised on a straight-line basis over the commitment period. A contract with a customer that results in a recognised financial instrument in the Bank’s financial statements may be partially in the scope of IFRS 9 and partially in the scope of IFRS 15. If this is the case, then the Bank first applies IFRS 9 to separate and measure the part of the contract that is in the scope of IFRS 9 and then applies IFRS 15 to the residual. Other fee and commission expenses relate mainly to transaction and service fees, which are expensed as the services 
are received.
d. Net Trading Income
Net trading income comprises gains less losses relating to trading assets and liabilities, including realised and unrealised fair value changes, interest and foreign exchange differences.
e. Dividend IncomeDividend income is recognized in profit or loss when the Bank’s right to payment income is established.
f. Leases
The Company assesses at contract inception whether a contract is, or contains, a lease. That is, if the contract conveys the right to control the use of an identified asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration.   
The Company applies a single recognition and 
measurement approach for all leases, except for short-term leases and leases of low-value assets. The company recognises lease liabilities to make lease payments and right-of-use assets representing the right to use the underlying assets.
Right-of-use assets 
The Company recognises right-of-use assets at the commencement date of the lease (i.e., the date the underlying asset is available for use). Right-of-use assets are measured at cost, less any accumulated depreciation and impairment losses, and adjusted for any remeasurement of lease liabilities. Low value assets and short-term leases are classified as operating leases and are not recognized in the Bank’s statement of financial position. These leases are recognised on a straight-line basis.
Lease liabilities
At the commencement date of the lease, the Company recognises lease liabilities measured at the present value of lease payments to be made over the lease term. The lease payments include fixed payments (less any lease incentives receivable), variable lease payments that depend on an index or a rate, and amounts expected to be paid under residual value guarantees. The lease payments also include the exercise price of a purchase option reasonably certain to be exercised by the Company and payments of penalties for terminating the lease if the lease term reflects exercising the option to terminate. Variable lease payments that do not depend on an index or a rate are recognised as expenses in the period in which the event or condition that triggers the payment occurs.
g. Income TaxIncome tax expense comprises current and deferred tax. Income tax expense is recognized in profit or loss 2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements48except to the extent that it relates to items recognized 
in equity or OCI.
Current tax is the expected tax on tax payable on 
taxable income for the period, using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date.
Deferred tax is recognized in respect of temporary 
differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for taxation purposes.  Deferred tax is not recognized for the following temporary differences: the initial recognition of goodwill, the initial recognition of assets and liabilities in a transaction that is not a business combination and that affects neither accounting nor taxable profit.
Deferred tax is measured at the tax rates that are 
expected to be applied to the temporary differences when reversed, based on laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.  A deferred tax asset is recognized only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the asset can be utilized.  Deferred tax assets are reviewed at each reporting date and are reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that the related tax benefit will be realized.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset if there is a 
legally enforceable right to offset current tax liabilities and assets, and they relate to taxes levied by the same tax authority on the same taxable entity, or on different tax entities, but they intend to settle current tax liabilities and assets on a net basis or the tax assets and liabilities will be realised simultaneously.
h. Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities
i. Recognition
The Bank initially recognises loans and advances, deposits, debt securities issued on the date on which they are originated. All other financial instruments (including regular-way purchases and sales of financial assets) are recognised on the trade date, which is the date on which the Bank becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument. A financial asset or financial liability is measured initially at fair value plus, for an item not at FVTPL, transaction costs that are directly attributable to its acquisition or issue.
ii.    Classification
Financial assets 
The classification of financial instruments at initial recognition depends on their contractual terms and the business model for managing the instruments. Financial instruments are initially measured at their fair value, except in the case of financial assets and financial liabilities recorded at FVPL, transaction costs are added to, or subtracted from, this amount. Trade receivables are measured at the transaction price.
When the fair value of financial instruments at initial 
recognition differs from the transaction price, the Bank accounts for the Day 1 profit or loss.The Bank classifies all of its financial assets based on the business model for managing the assets and the asset’s contractual terms, measured at either:
• Amortised cost
• FVOCI
• FVTPL
Due from banks, Loans and advances to customers, Financial investments at amortised cost  
The Bank measures Due from banks, Loans and advances to customers and other financial investments at amortised cost only if both of the following conditions are met:  
• The financial asset is held within a business model with the objective to hold financial assets in order to collect contractual cash flows  
• The contractual terms of the financial asset give rise on specified dates to cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest (SPPI) on the principal amount outstanding  
The details of these conditions are outlined below.
Business model assessment  
The Bank determines its business model at the level that best reflects how it manages groups of financial assets to achieve its business objective:   
• The risks that affect the performance of the business model (and the financial assets held within that business model) and, in particular, the way those risks are managed.  
• How managers of the business are compensated (for example, whether the compensation is based on   the fair value of the assets managed or on the contractual cash flows collected). 
The expected frequency, value and timing of sales are also important aspects of the Bank’s assessment. The business model assessment is based on reasonably expected scenarios without taking ‘worst case’ or ‘stress case’ scenarios into account. If cash flows after initial recognition are realised in a way that is different from the  Bank’s original expectations, the Bank does not change the classification of the remaining financial assets held  in that business model, but incorporates such information when assessing newly originated or newly purchased financial assets going forward. 
The Solely Payments of Principal and interest test 
(SPPI)  As a second step of its classification process the Bank assesses the contractual terms of the financial asset to identify whether they meet the SPPI test.
‘Principal’ for the purpose of this test is defined as the 
fair value of the financial asset at initial recognition and may change over the life of the financial asset (for example, if there are repayments of principal or amortization of the premium/discount).49         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements49The most significant elements of interest within a 
lending arrangement are typically the consideration for the time value of money and credit risk. To make the SPPI assessment, the Bank applies judgement and considers relevant factors such as the currency in which the financial asset is denominated, and the period for which the interest rate is set. 
In contrast, contractual terms that introduce a more 
than the minimum exposure to risks or volatility in the contractual cash flows that are unrelated to a basic lending arrangement do not give rise to contractual cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the amount outstanding. In such cases, the financial asset is required to be measured at FVPL. 
Financial assets that are held for trading or managed 
and whose performance is evaluated on a fair value basis are measured at FVTPL because they are neither held to collect contractual cash flows nor held both to collect contractual cash flows and to sell financial assets. 
On initial recognition of an equity investment that is 
not held for trading, the Bank may irrevocably elect to present subsequent changes in fair value in OCI. This election is made on an investment-by-investment basis. All other financial assets are classified as measured at FVTPL. In addition, on initial recognition, the Bank may irrevocably designate a financial asset that otherwise meets the requirements to be measured at amortised cost or at FVOCI as at FVTPL if doing so eliminates or significantly reduces an accounting mismatch that would otherwise arise.
i. Fair Value Measurement‘Fair value’ is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date in the principal or, in its absence, the most advantageous market to which the Bank has access at that date. The fair value of a liability reflects its non-performance risk. When one is available, the Bank measures the fair value of an instrument using the quoted price in an active market for that instrument. A market is regarded as ‘active’ if transactions for the asset or liability take place with sufficient frequency and volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing basis. If there is no quoted price in an active market, then the Bank uses valuation techniques that maximise the use of relevant observable inputs and minimise the use of unobservable inputs. The chosen valuation technique incorporates all of the factors that market participants would take into account in pricing a transaction. The best evidence of the fair value of a financial instrument on initial recognition is normally the transaction price – i.e. the fair value of the consideration given or received. If the Bank determines that the fair value on initial recognition differs from the transaction price and the fair value is evidenced neither by a quoted price in an active market for an identical asset or liability nor based on a valuation technique for which any unobservable inputs are judged to be insignificant in relation to the measurement, then     the financial instrument is initially measured at fair value, adjusted to defer the difference between the fair value on initial recognition and the transaction price. Subsequently, that difference is recognised in profit or loss on an appropriate basis over the life of the instrument but no later than when the valuation is wholly supported by observable market data or the transaction is closed out. If an asset or a liability measured at fair value has a bid price and an ask price, then the Bank measures assets and long positions at a bid price and liabilities and short positions at an ask price.
j.   Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents include notes and coins on hand, unrestricted balances held with central banks and highly liquid financial assets with original maturities of three months or less from the date of acquisition that are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in their fair value, and are used by the Bank in the management of its short-term commitments. Cash and cash equivalents are carried at amortised cost in the statement of financial position.
For the purposes of the statement of cash flows, cash 
equivalents include short term liquid investments which are readily convertible into known amounts of cash and which were within three months of maturity when acquired.
k. Investment SecuritiesThe ‘investment securities’ caption in the statement of financial position includes: equity investment securities designated as at FVOCI.
When equity instruments are measured at FVOCI, 
gains and losses on such equity instruments are never reclassified to profit or loss and no impairment is recognised in profit or loss. Dividends are recognised in profit or loss unless they clearly represent a recovery of part of the cost of the investment, in which case they are recognised in OCI. Cumulative gains and losses recognised in OCI are transferred to retained earnings on disposal of an investment.
l.  Property, Plant and Equipment 
i.    Recognition and measurement
Items of property, plant and equipment are measured at cost less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses or as professionally revalued from time to time less accumulated depreciation. Cost includes expenditure that are directly attributable to the acquisition of the asset. The cost of self -constructed assets includes the cost of materials and direct labour, any other costs directly attributable to bringing the assets to a working condition for their intended use, the costs of dismantling and removing the items and restoring the site on which they are located, and capitalised borrowing costs.
Land and building are measured at fair value. Changes 
in fair value are recorded in OCI and credited to the 2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements50asset revaluation surplus in equity. However, to the 
extent that it reverses a revaluation deficit of the same asset previously recognised in profit or loss, the increase is recognised in profit and loss. A revaluation deficit is recognised in the statement of profit or loss, except to the extent that it offsets an existing surplus on the same asset recognised in the asset revaluation surplus. Revaluation are performed on a regular basis. Accumulated depreciation as at the revaluation date is eliminated against the gross carrying amount of the asset and the net amount is restated to the revalued amount of the asset. Upon disposal, any revaluation surplus relating to the particular asset being sold is transferred to retained earnings
Purchased intangible assets that is integral to the 
functionality of the related equipment is capitalised as part of that equipment.
Increases in the carrying amount arising on revaluation 
are credited to a revaluation surplus.  Decreases that offset previous increases of the same asset are charged against the revaluation surplus.  All other decreases are charged to profit or loss.
When parts of an item of property or equipment 
have different useful lives, they are accounted for as separate items (major components) of property and equipment.
Capital Work in Progress is carried at cost less 
accumulated impairment.
The gain or loss on disposal of an item of property, 
plant and equipment is determined by comparing the proceeds from disposal with the carrying amount of the item of property, plant and equipment and is recognised in other income/other expenses in profit or loss.
i
i. Subsequent costs
The cost of replacing part of an item of property or equipment is recognised in the carrying amount of the item if it is probable that the future economic benefits embodied within the part will flow to the Bank and its cost can be measured reliably. The costs of the day-to-day servicing of property, plant and equipment are recognised in profit or loss as incurred.
ii
i. Depreciation
Depreciation is calculated over the depreciable 
amount, which is the cost of the asset, or other amount substituted for cost, less its residual value.  Depreciation is recognised in profit or loss on a straight-line basis over its expected useful lives of each part of an item or property and equipment, since this most closely reflects the expected pattern consumption of the future economic benefits embodied in the asset.  Land is not depreciated
The estimated useful lives for the current and comparative periods are as follows:
Buildings                    20 year
Motor vehicles                   4 yearsFurniture and equipment     5 yearsComputers                    5 years
Leasehold Improvement      lower of the estimated               
                    useful life and the lease  
                                             tenor
Depreciation methods, useful lives and residual values 
are reassessed at each reporting date and adjusted if appropriate.
m. Intangible AssetsComputer intangible
Intangible assets comprise computer intangible.  
Intangible acquired by the Bank is measured at cost less accumulated amortization and any accumulated impairment losses.
Subsequent expenditure on intangible is capitalized 
only when it increases future economic benefits embodied in the specific asset to which it relates.  All other expenditure is expensed as incurred.
intangible is amortized on a straight-line basis and 
recognized in profit or loss over its estimated useful life, from the date that it is available for use.  The estimated useful life of intangible for the current and comparative periods is five years. 
Amortization methods, useful lives and residual values 
are reviewed at each reporting date and adjusted, if appropriate.
n. Impairment of Non-financial AssetsThe carrying amounts of the Bank’s non-financial assets other than corporate tax assets and deferred tax assets, are reviewed at each reporting date to determine whether there is any indication of impairment.  If any such indication exists, then the asset’s recoverable amount is estimated.  An impairment loss is recognised if the carrying amount of an asset or its cash-generating unit exceeds its recoverable amount.  A cash-generating unit is the smallest identifiable asset that generates cash flows that are largely independent from other assets.  Impairment losses are recognised in profit or loss. Impairment losses recognised in respect of cash generating units are allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the units and then to reduce the carrying amount of the other assets in the unit (group of units) on a pro rata basis.
The recoverable amount of an asset or cash-
generating unit is the greater of its value in use and its fair value less costs to sell.  In assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pre-tax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.
In respect of other assets, impairment losses 
recognised in prior periods are assessed at each reporting date for any indications that the loss has decreased or no longer exists.  An impairment loss is reversed if there has been a change in the estimates 51         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements51used to determine the recoverable amount.  An 
impairment loss is reversed only to the extent that the asset’s carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined, net of depreciation or amortisation, if no impairment loss had been recognized.
o. Deposits and Borrowed FundsDeposits and borrowings from other banks are the Bank’s sources of debt funding. The Bank classifies capital instruments as financial liabilities or equity instruments in accordance with the substance of the contractual terms of the instrument.
Deposits and borrowings from other banks are initially 
measured at fair value plus transaction costs, and subsequently measured at their amortised cost using the effective interest method, except where the Bank chooses to carry the liabilities at fair value through profit or loss.
p. ProvisionsProvisions are recognised when the Bank has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of past events that can be reliably estimated and it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation.  Restructuring provisions comprise lease termination penalties and employee termination payments.  Provisions are not recognised for future operating losses.
Where there are a number of similar obligations which 
are likely to result in an outflow to settle related classes of obligations as a whole, a provision is recognised even if the likelihood of an outflow with respect to any one item included in the same class of obligations may be small.
Provisions are measured at the present value of 
expenditures expected to be required to settle obligations using pre-tax rates that reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and risks specific to the obligation.  An increase in the provision due to passage of time is recognised as an interest expense.
q. Financial Guarantee and Loan CommitmentsFinancial guarantees are initially recognised in the financial statements (within Other Liabilities) at fair value, being the premium received. Subsequent to initial recognition, the Bank’s liability under each guarantee is measured at the higher of the amount initially recognised less cumulative amortisation recognised in the income statement, and an ECL allowance as set out in Note 40. 
The premium received is recognised in the income 
statement in Net fees and commission income on a straight-line basis over the life of the guarantee. 
Undrawn loan commitments and letters of credits are 
commitments under which, over the duration of the commitment, the Bank is required to provide a loan with pre-specified terms to the customer. Similar to financial guarantee contracts, these contracts are in the scope of the ECL requirements.The nominal contractual value of financial guarantees, letters of credit and undrawn loan commitments, where the loan agreed to be provided is on market terms, are not recorded on in the statement of financial position.  The nominal values of these instruments together with the corresponding ECL are disclosed in Note 40. 
r. Fiduciary ActivitiesThe Bank acts as trustees and in other fiduciary capacities that result in the holding or placing of assets on behalf of individuals, trusts, retirement benefit plans and other institutions.  These assets and income arising thereon are excluded from these financial statements, as they are not assets of the Bank.
s.  Employee BenefitsRetirement benefit cost
The Bank contributes to the statutory Social Security 
& National Insurance Trust (SSNIT).  This is a defined contribution scheme registered under the National Social Security Act.  The Bank’s obligations under the scheme are limited to specific contributions legislated from time to time and are currently limited to a maximum of 13% of an employee’s basic salary per month.  The Bank also operates a defined contribution benefit scheme for its employees. 
The assets of this scheme are held by the treasury 
department of the Bank.  The scheme is funded by contributions from both the employees and employer.  Benefits are paid to retiring staff in accordance with the scheme rules. The Bank’s obligations to staff retirement benefit schemes are charged to the profit or loss in the year to which they relate.
 Provision for employee entitlementEmployee entitlements to annual leave are recognised when they accrue to employees.  A provision is made for the estimated liability for annual leave accrued at the year end. 
 Short-term employment benefitsShort-term employee benefit obligations are measured on an undiscounted basis and are expensed as the related service is provided.  A provision is recognized for the amount expected to be paid under short-term cash bonus or profit-sharing plans, if the bank has a present legal or constructive obligation to pay this amount as a result of past service provided by the employee and the obligation can be estimated reliably.
 Long service awardsThe bank has other long-term employee benefits scheme in the form a long service award for its employees.  These are long service awards which accrue to employees based on graduated periods of uninterrupted service.  These awards accrue over the service life of employees.  Employees leaving the service of the bank after 5 years through retirement (both voluntary and compulsory) or resignation become eligible for these awards based on their current entitlement at the time of retirement or resignation based on their length of service. The bank has no further obligation after the staff exits the bank. The benefits are unfunded.2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements52t.   Stated Capital and Reserves
 i.   Share capital
The Bank classifies capital and equity instruments 
in accordance with the contractual terms of the instrument.  The Bank’s share capital is not redeemable by holders in the normal course of business and bears an entitlement to distributions that is non-cumulative and at the discretion of the Directors.  Accordingly, they are presented as a component of issued capital within equity.
ii.   Share issue costs
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of an equity instrument are deducted from equity.
iii.   Dividend on equity shares
Dividends on equity shares are recognized in the period in which they are approved by the shareholders.  Dividend proposed which is yet to be approved by shareholders, is disclosed by way of notes. 
iv.   Statutory reserves
Statutory reserves are based on the requirements of section 34(i) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit–Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).  Transfers into statutory reserves are made in accordance with the relationship between the Bank’s reserve fund and its paid-up capital, which determines the proportion of profits for the period that should be transferred.
v.   Credit risk reserves
This is a reserve created to set aside the excess or shortfalls between amounts recognized as impairment loss on loans and advances based on provisions made for bad and doubtful loans and advances calculated in accordance with IFRS and the Central Bank’s prudential guidelines.
u. Earnings Per ShareThe Bank presents basic earnings per share (EPS) data for its equityy shares. Basic EPS is calculated by dividing the profit or loss attributable to equity shareholders of the Bank by the weighted average number of equity shares outstanding during the year.
v. Investment in Associates 
      (equity – accounted investees)
Associates are those entities in which the Bank has significant influence but not control or joint control, over the financial and operating policies. Interests in associates are accounted for using the equity method.
They are recognized initially at cost, which includes 
transaction costs. Subsequent to initial recognition, the financial statements include the Bank’s share of the profit or loss and OCI of equity-accounted investees, until the date on which significant influence ceases.
w. Operating SegmentsA segment is a distinguishable component of the Bank that is engaged either in providing products or services (business segment), or in providing products or services within a particular economic environment (geographical segment), which is subject to risks and rewards that are different from those of other segments.
The Bank’s primary format for segment reporting is 
based on business segments. 
The Bank has the following main business segments:• Corporate Banking: includes loans, deposits and 
other transactions and balances with corporate customers including the Agricultural sector.
• Retail Banking: includes loans, deposits and other transactions and balances with retail customers..
• Central Treasury: undertakes the Bank’s funding and centralised risk management activities through borrowings, issues of debt securities, use of derivatives for risk management purposes and investing in liquid assets such as short-term placements and corporate and government debt securities.
4.   SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS,  
      ESTIMATES AND ASSUMPTIONS
The preparation of the Bank’s financial statements requires management to make judgements, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities,and the accompanying disclosures, as well as the disclosure of contingent liabilities. Uncertainty about these assumptions and estimates could result in outcomes that require a material adjustment to the carrying amount of assets or liabilities affected in future periods. In the process of applying the Bank’s accounting policies, management has made the following judgements and assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty at the reporting date, that have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year. Existing circumstances and assumptions about future developments may change due to circumstances beyond the Bank’s control and are reflected in the assumptions if and when they occur. Items with the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in the financial statements with substantial management judgement and/or estimates are collated below with respect to judgements/estimates involved.
4.1. Impairment losses on financial assets
The measurement of impairment losses both under IFRS 9 across all categories of financial assets requires judgement, in particular, the estimation of the amount and timing of future cash flows and collateral values when determining impairment losses and the assessment of a significant increase in credit risk. These estimates are driven by a number of factors, changes in which can result in different levels of allowances.
The Bank’s ECL calculations are outputs of complex 
models with a number of underlying assumptions regarding the choice of variable inputs and their 53         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements53interdependencies. Elements of the ECL models that 
are considered accounting judgements and estimates include:
• The Bank’s internal credit grading model, which 
assigns PDs to the individual grades
• The Bank’s criteria for assessing if there has been a significant increase in credit risk and so allowances for financial assets should be measured on a LTECL basis and the qualitative assessment
• The segmentation of financial assets when their ECL is assessed on a collective basis
• Development of ECL models, including the various formulas and the choice of inputs
• Determination of associations between macroeconomic scenarios and, economic inputs, such as unemployment levels and collateral values, and the effect on PDs, EADs and LGDs
• Selection of forward-looking macroeconomic scenarios and their probability weightings, to derive the economic inputs into the ECL models.
5.   FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
5.1  Introduction and overview
The Bank’s activities expose it to a variety of financial risks and those activities involve the analysis, evaluation, acceptance and management of some degree of risk or combination of risks. Taking risk is core to the Bank’s business, and the operational risks are an inevitable consequence of being in business. The Bank’s aim is therefore to achieve an appropriate balance between risk and return and minimize potential adverse effects on its financial performance. The most important types of risk include:
• Operational risk
• Credit risk
• Liquidity risk
• Market risk - includes currency, interest rate and 
other price risk
5.2  Risk management framework
The Board of Directors has overall responsibility 
for the establishment and oversight of the Bank’s risk management framework. The board has established Board Audit and Risk Committees and a risk department to assist in the discharge of this responsibility. The board has also established the Credit Committee which is responsible for developing and monitoring risk management in their respective areas.
The Bank’s risk management policies are established 
to identify and analyse the risks faced by the Bank, to set appropriate risk limits and controls, and to monitor risks and adherence to limits. Risk management policies and systems are reviewed regularly to reflect changes in market conditions, products and services offered.The Bank, through its training and management standards and procedures, aims to develop a disciplined and constructive control environment, in which all employees understand their roles and obligations.
The Bank’s Audit and Risk Management Committees 
are responsible for monitoring compliance with the Bank’s risk management policies and procedures, and for reviewing the adequacy of the risk management framework in relation to the risks faced by the Bank.  The Audit and Risk Management Committees are assisted in these functions by Internal Audit and the Risk Management departments.  Internal Audit undertakes both regular and ad-hoc reviews of risk management controls and procedures, the results of which are reported to the Board Audit Committee.
The Bank has a Risk Management department 
organised into credit control, recoveries and operational control.  Under the credit control department, it has credit administration, credit risk appraisal and credit monitoring.  The department is responsible for managing all risks to which the Bank is exposed (operational risk, credit risk, liquidity risk, interest rate risk and foreign currency risk.)  The risk management department is developing a risk management framework for the Bank.
The Bank treats all branches as independent 
business units which generate their own income, run their ownprofit or loss statement and statement of financial position.  The head office consolidates these andexercises oversight responsibility over all the branches.  Credit is generated at the branch level and is then channeled through the credit control unit of the risk management department where a credit risk appraisal is performed to assess whether to engage the client or not.
The client’s file is then moved to the head of risk 
management and to the other appropriate levels (credit committee, board and so on) for final approval before credit is granted.  There is also the monitoring aspect where the head office credit monitoring team monitors the loans and their performance in addition to the monitoring performed at the branch level.  Where a loan goes beyond current, it is classified as either OLEM, substandard, doubtful or loss, as recommended by the Central Bank of Ghana.  Where a loan goes beyond current, there is the recoveries team which moves in to recover loan losses. 
Overall authority for market risk is vested in the ALCO. 
The Risk Management unit is responsible for the development of detailed risk management policies (subject to review and approval by ALCO) and for the day-to-day review of their implementation.
Exposure to other market risks – Non-trading 
portfolios.
The principal risk to which non-trading portfolios are 
exposed is the risk of loss from fluctuations in the 2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements54future cash flows or fair values of financial instruments 
because of a change in market interest rates. Interest rate risk is managed principally through monitoring interest rate gaps and by having pre-approved limits for repricing bands. ALCO is the monitoring body for compliance with these limits and is assisted by Central Treasury in its day-to-day monitoring activities.
In the last three years, the Bank has taken steps to 
provide the necessary safeguards to ensure that market risk is kept within reasonable limits.
5.3 Operational Risk
Operational risk is the risk of direct or indirect loss arising from a wide variety of causes associated with the Bank’s processes, personnel, technology and infrastructure and from external factors other than credit, market and liquidity risk such as those arising from legal and regulatory requirements and generally accepted standards of corporate behavior.
The Bank’s objective is to manage operational risk so 
as to balance the avoidance of financial losses and damage to the Bank’s reputation with overall cost effectiveness and to avoid control procedures that restrict initiative and creativity.
The primary responsibility for the development and 
implementation of controls to address operational risk is assigned to senior management within each business unit.  The responsibility is supported by the development of overall bank’s standard for the management of operational risk in the following areas:
• Requirement of appropriate segregation of 
duties, including the independent authorization of transactions;
• Requirements for the reconciliation and monitoring of transactions;
• Compliance with regulatory and other legal requirements;
• Documentation of controls and procedures;
• Requirements for the periodic assessment of operational losses faced and adequacy of controls and procedures to address risks identified;
• Requirement for the reporting of operational losses and proposed remedial action;
• Development of contingency plans;
• Training and professional development;
• Ethical and business standards;
• Risk mitigation including insurance where this is effective.
Compliance with bank’s standards is supported by a 
program of periodic reviews undertaken by internal audit, risk and compliance departments.  The results of these reviews are discussed with the management of the business unit to which they relate, with summaries submitted to executive committee, audit and compliance committee, governance and risk committee and the board.
Over the past three years, operational risks have 
reduced due to constant training, automation of many processes and enhancement in controls.5.4 Credit Risk
Credit risk is the risk that the Bank will incur a loss because its customers or counterparties fail to discharge their contractual obligations. The Bank manages and controls credit risk by setting limits on the amount of risk it is willing to accept for individual counterparties and for industry concentrations, and by monitoring exposures in relation to such limits. Credit risk is monitored by the Credit Risk Department of the Bank. It is their responsibility to review and manage credit risk, for all types of counterparties. Credit risk consists of line credit risk managers who are responsible for their business lines and manage specific portfolios and experts who support both the line credit risk manager, as well as the business with tools like credit risk systems, policies, models and reporting. The Bank has established a credit quality review process to provide early identification of possible changes in the creditworthiness of counterparties, including regular collateral revisions. Counterparty limits are established by the use of a credit risk classification models, which assigns each counterparty a risk rating. Risk ratings are subject to regular revision. The credit quality review process aims to allow the Bank to assess the potential loss as a result of the risks to which it is exposed and take corrective actions.
For risk management reporting purposes, the Bank 
considers and consolidates all elements of credit risk exposure.
5.4.1 Management of Credit Risk
The Board of Directors has delegated responsibility for the management of credit risk to its Credit-Committee and Sub-Board Risk Management Committee.  A separate Credit department, reporting to the Executive Committee, is responsible for oversight of the Bank’s credit risk, including:
• Formulating credit policies in consultation with 
business units, covering collateral requirements, credit assessment, risk grading and reporting, documentary and legal procedures, and compliance with regulatory and statutory requirements.
• Establishing the authorisation structure for the approval and renewal of credit facilities. Authorisation limits are allocated to business units.  Larger facilities require approval by the Executive Committee members and the Board (Sub Committee) on risk management.
• Reviewing and assessing credit risk. The Credit department assesses all credit exposures in excess of designated limits, prior to facilities being committed to customers by the business unit concerned. Renewals and reviews of facilities are subject to the same review process.  Limiting concentrations of exposure to counterparties, geographies and industries (for loans and advances), and by issuer, credit rating band, market liquidity and country (for investment securities)..55         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements55• Developing and maintaining the Bank’s risk 
grading in order to categories exposures according to the degree of risk of financial loss faced and to focus management on the attendant risks.  The risk grading system is used in determining where impairment provisions may be required against specific credit exposures.  The current risk grading framework consists of 5 grades reflecting varying degrees of risk of default and the availability of collateral or other credit risk mitigation.  The responsibility for setting risk grades lies with the Board of Directors. Risk grades are subject to regular reviews by the Risk Management Department.
• Reviewing compliance of business units with agreed exposure limits, including those for selected industries, country risk and product types.  Regular reports are provided by the credit department on the credit quality of portfolios and appropriate corrective action is taken.
• Providing advice, guidance and specialist skills to business units to promote best practice throughout the Bank in the management of credit risk.
5.4.2. Credit–related Commitments Risks
The Bank makes available to its customers guarantees that may require that the Bank makes payments on their behalf and enters into commitments to extend credit lines to secure their liquidity needs. Letters of credit and guarantees (including standby letters of credit) commit the Bank to make payments on behalf of customers in the event of a specific act, generally related to the import or export of goods. Such commitments expose the Bank to similar risks to loans and are mitigated by the same control processes and policies management of credit risk.
5.4.3.  Definition of Default and Cure
The Bank considers a financial instrument defaulted and therefore Stage 3 (credit-impaired) for ECL calculations in all cases when the borrower becomes 90 days past due on its contractual payments. The Bank considers treasury and interbank balances defaulted and takes immediate action when the required intraday payments are not settled by the close of business as outlined in the individual agreements. As a part of a qualitative assessment of whether a customer is in default, the Bank also considers a variety of instances that may indicate unlikeliness to pay. When such events occur, the Bank carefully considers whether the event should result in treating the customer as defaulted and therefore assessed as Stage 3 for ECL calculations or whether Stage 2 is appropriate. Such events include:
• Internal rating of the borrower indicating default or near-default
• The borrower requesting emergency funding from the Bank
• The borrower is deceased
• A material decrease in the underlying collateral value where the recovery of the loan is expected from the sale of the collateral
• A material decrease in the borrower’s turnover or the loss of a major customer
• A covenant breach not waived by the Bank
• The debtor facing financial difficulties
It is the Bank’s policy to consider a financial instrument as ‘cured’ and therefore re-classified out of Stage 3 when none of the default criteria have been present for at least five consecutive months. The decision whether to classify an asset as Stage 2 or Stage 1 once cured depends on the updated credit grade, at the time of the cure, and whether this indicates there has been a significant increase/decrease in credit risk compared to initial recognition.
5.4.4.  The Bank’s Internal Rating and PD estimation             Process
The Bank’s Credit Risk Department operates its internal rating models. The Bank runs separate models for its key portfolios in which its customers are rate from 1 to 6 using internal grades. The models incorporate both qualitative and quantitative information and, in addition to information specific to the borrower, utilise supplemental external information that could affect the borrower’s ability to pay. Where practical, they also build on information from Credit Bureaus. These information sources are first used to determine the PDs within the Bank’s framework. The internal credit grades are assigned based on these Based II grades. PDs are then adjusted for IFRS 9 ECL calculations to incorporate forward looking information and the IFRS 9 Stage classification of the exposure. This is repeated for each economic scenario as appropriate.
Each exposure is allocated to a credit risk 
grade on initial recognition based on available information about the borrower. Exposures are subject to ongoing monitoring, which may result in an exposure being moved to a different credit risk grade. The monitoring typically involves use of the following data
Corporate Exposures: 
• Information obtained during periodic review 
of customer files – e.g. audited financial statements, management accounts, budgets and projections. Examples of areas of particular focus are: gross profit margins, financial leverage ratios, debt service coverage, compliance with covenants, quality of management, senior management changes.
5.4.5.  The Bank’s Internal Rating and PD Estimation            Process
Retail Exposures
• Internally collected data on customer behavior 
• Affordability metrics2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements56• External data from credit reference agencies
• All Exposures
• Payment record – this includes overdue status 
as well as a range of variables about payment ratios
• Utilization of the granted limit
• Requests for and granting of restructuring
• Existing and forecast changes in business, financial and economic conditions
Generating the term structure of PD• Credit risk grades are a primary input into the determination of the term structure of PD for exposures. The Bank collects performance and default information about its credit risk exposures analyzed by type of product and borrower as well as by credit risk grading. For some portfolios, information purchased from external credit reference agencies is also used. The Bank employs statistical models to analyse the data collected and generate estimates of the remaining lifetime PD of exposures and how these are expected to change as a result of the passage of time.
Bank’s internal rating
Grade 1-3: low fair risk
Advances in this category are those for which the 
borrower is up to date (i.e. current) with repayments of both principal and interest.  Indications that an overdraft is still current would include regular activity on the account with no sign that a hardcore of debt is building up.
Grade 4-5Advances in this category are currently protected by adequate security, both as to principal and interest, but they are potentially weak and constitute an undue credit risk, although not to the point of justifying the classification of substandard.  This category would include unusual advances due to the nature of the advance, customer or project, advances where there is a lack of financial information or any other advance where there is more than a normal degree of risk.
Grade 6
Substandard advances display well-defined credit weaknesses that jeopardise the liquidation of the debt.  Substandard advances include loans to borrowers whose cash flow is not sufficient to meet currently maturing debt, loans to borrowers which are significantly undercapitalised, and loans to borrowers lacking sufficient working capital to meet their operating needs.  Substandard advances are not protected by the current sound worth and paying capacity of the customer.
Grade 7
Doubtful advances exhibit all the weaknesses inherent in advances classified as substandard with the added characteristics that the advances are not well-secured and the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions and values, highly questionable and improbable.  The possibility of loss is extremely high, but because of certain important and reasonably specific pending factors, which may work to the advantage and strengthening of the advance, its classification as in estimated loss is deferred until its more exact status may be determined.
Non-performing loans and receivables which are 
at least 180 days overdue, but less than 360 days overdue are also classified as doubtful.
Grade 8
Advances classified as a loss are considered uncollectable and of such little value that their continuation as recoverable advances is not warranted.  This classification does not mean that the advance has absolutely no recovery value, but rather it is not practical or desirable to defer writing off this basically worthless advance even though partial recovery may be affected in the future.  Advances classified as a loss include bankrupt companies and loans to insolvent firms with negative working capital and cash flow.  Banks should not retain advances on the books while attempting long-term recoveries.  Losses should be taken in the period in which they surface as uncollectable.
Non-performing loans and receivables which are 
360 days or more overdue are also classified as a loss.
5.4.6    Exposure at Default
The exposure at default (EAD) represents the gross carrying amount of the financial instruments subject to the impairment calculation, addressing both the client’s ability to increase its exposure while approaching default and potential early repayments too. To calculate the EAD for a Stage 1 loan, the Bank assesses the possible default events within 12 months for the calculation of the 12mECL. However, if a Stage 1 loan that is expected to default in the 12 months from the balance sheet date and is also expected to cure and subsequently default again, then all linked default events are considered. For Stage 2, Stage 3 and POCI financial assets, the exposure at default is considered for events over the lifetime of the instruments.
The Bank determines EADs by modelling the range 
of possible exposure outcomes at various points in time, corresponding the multiple scenarios. The IFRS 9 PDs are then assigned to each economic scenario based on the outcome of Bank’s models.
5.4.7    Loss Given Default
For corporate and investment banking financial instruments, LGD values are assessed at least every year by account managers and reviewed and approved by the Bank’s Credit Risk Department. The credit risk assessment is based on a standardised LGD assessment framework that results in a certain LGD rate. These LGD 57         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements57rates consider the expected EAD in comparison to 
the amount expected to be recovered or realised from any collateral held. The Bank segments its retail lending products into smaller homogeneous portfolios, based on key characteristic that are relevant to the estimation of future cash flows. The applied data is based on historically collected loss data and involves a wider set of transaction characteristics (e.g., product type, wider range of collateral types) as well as borrower characteristics. 
Further recent data and forward-looking economic 
scenarios are used in order to determine the IFRS 9 LGD rate for each group of financial instruments. When assessing forward-looking information, the expectation is based on multiple scenarios. Examples of key inputs involve changes in, collateral values including property prices for mortgages, commodity prices, payment status or other factors that are indicative of losses in the Bank. The Bank estimates regulatory and IFRS 9 LGDs on a different basis. Under IFRS 9, LGD rates are estimated for the Stage 1, Stage 2 and Stage 3 of each asset class. The inputs for these LGD rates are estimated and, where possible, calibrated through back testing against recent recoveries. These are repeated for each economic scenario as appropriate.
5.4.8    Significant Increase in Credit Risk
The Bank continuously monitors all assets subject to ECLs. In order to determine whether an instrument or a portfolio of instruments is subject to 12mECL or LTECL, the Bank assesses whether there has been a significant increase in credit risk since initial recognition. The Bank considers an exposure to have significantly increased in credit risk when the IFRS 9 lifetime PD has doubled since initial recognition and has increased by more than 20 bps a year.
The Bank also applies a secondary qualitative 
method for triggering a significant increase in credit risk for an asset, such as moving a customer/facility to the watch list, or the account becoming forborne. In certain cases, the Bank may also consider that events explained earlier are a significant increase in credit risk as opposed to a default. Regardless of the change in credit grades, if contractual payments are more than 30 days past due, the credit risk is deemed to have increased significantly since initial recognition.
When estimating ECLs on a collective basis for a 
group of similar assets, the Bank applies the same principles for assessing whether there has been a significant increase in credit risk since initial recognition.
As explained earlier dependent on the factors 
below, the Bank calculates ECLs either on a collective or an individual basis.
Asset classes where the Bank calculates ECL on 
an individual basis include:
• All Stage 3 assets, regardless of the class of financial assets• The Corporate lending portfolio
• The large and unique exposures of the Small business lending portfolio
• The treasury, trading and interbank relationships (such as Due from Banks, Cash collateral on securities borrowed and reverse repurchase agreements and debt instruments at amortised cost/FVOCI.
Asset classes where the Bank calculates ECL on a collective basis include the smaller and more generic balances of the Bank’s retail business lending
Incorporation of forward-looking information
The Bank incorporates forward-looking information into both the assessment of whether the credit risk of an instrument has increased significantly since its initial recognition and the measurement of ECL. The Bank formulates three economic scenarios:
• A base case, which is the median scenario assigned a 50% (2021: 70%) probability of occurring, and 
• two less likely scenarios; 
• one upside 15% (2021:15%) and 
• one downside 35% (2021:15%) probability of occurring.
The base case is aligned with information used by the Bank for other purposes such as strategic planning and budgeting. External information considered includes economic data and forecasts published by governmental bodies and monetary authorities. Periodically, the Bank carries out stress testing of more extreme shocks to calibrate its determination of the upside and downside representative scenarios.  The Bank has identified and documented key drivers of credit risk and credit losses for each portfolio of financial instruments and, using an analysis of historical data, has estimated relationships between macro-economic variables and credit risk and credit losses. The key drivers for credit risk are: GDP growth, and interest rates.
Analysis of average inputs to the ECL model under multiple economic scenarios per is detailed below
As at 31 December 2022
Key Drivers Scenario 2022
GDPBase case 6.30%
Upside 6.50%
Downside 5.50%
InflationBase case 9.00%
upside 8.90%
downside 10.80%
Interest ratesBase case 19.00%
upside 16.50%
downside 20.60%2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements58Non Performing 
loan ratioBase case 21.59%
upside 20.25%
downside 22.80%
As at 31 December 2021
Key drivers Scenario 2021
GDP Base case 6.70%
Upside 7.30%
Downside 5.40%
Inflation Base case 7.90%
upside 7.70%
downside 8.30%
Interest rates Base case 19.00%
upside 17.00%
downside 19.80%
Non Performing 
loan ratioBase case 20.00%
upside 19.60%
downside 21.62%
5.4.9   Measurement of ECL
The key inputs into the measurement of ECL are the term structure of the following variables:
• probability of default (PD);
• loss given default (LGD); and
• exposure at default (EAD)
• GDP growth and interest rates
12 months ECL for exposures in Stage 1 is calculated by multiplying the 12-month PD by LGD and EAD. Lifetime ECL is calculated by multiplying the lifetime PD by LGD and EAD. The methodology of estimating PDs, LGD and EAD has been discussed above.
5.4.10 Settlement Risk
• Settlement Risk is the risk that counterparty will fail to deliver cash (or securities) due to be delivered at a particular moment in time, following the release of the corresponding cash (or Securities) by the bank in settlement of a transaction. Further details in respect of this category of credit risk are contained in the Wholesale Credit Risk below.
• Intraday ExposureIntraday Exposure is a revolving exposure, which arises whenever funds are irrevocably paid away by the Bank in the expectation of the receipt of cleared covering funds (or the deposit of collateral) at some time during the same business day. The Bank may be acting either in its own right, or on behalf of a customer, when it pays away the funds. The products, which give rise to Intraday Exposure, include forex settlements.
• The intraday credit, which the Bank allows its customers, is always in expectation of incoming funds, and as such the exposure is real in that it manifests itself as a borrowing/overdraft when things go wrong. 
• The true extent of Intraday Exposure to a customer will be calculated as a single running balance taken at any one point in the day. This running balance will be adjusted by each single transfer of funds into and out of any account in that customer’s name, where such transfers represent cleared funds. The same principles apply when accounts are grouped (and where set-off is available) to produce an aggregate net exposure.
5.4.11 Credit Risk Transfers
• This risk arises when certain eligible collateral types (including risk participations, standby letters of credit and bank guarantees) are held to mitigate obligor risk. Whilst these instruments can significantly mitigate obligor credit risk, an alternative risk arises, being reimbursement risk - the risk that the participant/guarantor fails to honour their commitment in the event that the underlying obligor defaults (this is also referred to as double default risk).
5.4.12  Analysis of credit quality
The tables below set out information about the credit quality of financial assets and the allowance for impairment/loss held by the Bank against those assets.59         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements59Maximum Exposure to Credit Risk
Bank BalancesLoans & Advances 
to CustomerInvestment Securities Due from BanksCommitments 
& Guarantee
2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross 
amount1,613,509 735,718 3,754,196 2,745,387 1,657,728 2,400,655 387,220 610,779 4,627,480 174,527
Allowance for impairment- - (512,007) (463,075) (341,145) -(37,500) (3,497) (7,860) (1,728)
1,613,509 735,718 3,242,189 2,282,312 1,316,584 2,400,655 349,720 607,282 4,619,620 172,799
Bank BalancesLoans & Advances 
to CustomersInvestment 
SecuritiesDue from
 other BanksCommitments & 
Financial Guarantees
2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
At amortised cost
Grade 1-3: low fair 
risk 
Current 1,613,509 735,718 1,991,595 1,803,244 1,657,729 2,400,655 387,220 610,779 4,627,480 174,527
Grade 4-5: watch 
list  
OLEM 837,008 267,983 - - - -
Grade 6: 
substandard283,832 43,748 - - - - - -
Grade 7: doubtful 114,152 98,809 - - - - - -
Grade 8: loss - - 527,609 551,171 - - - - - -
Total gross amount 1,613,509 735,718 3,754,196 2,764,956 1,657,729 2,400,655 387,220 610,779 4,627,480 174,527
Allowance for impairment- -(512,007) (463,075) (341,145) - (37,500) (3,497) (7,860) (1,728)
Net carrying amount1,613,509 735,718 3,242,188 2,301,881 1,316,584 2,400,655 349,720 607,282 4,619,620 172,799
**The commitments and guarantees are not held at amortised cost and the “net carrying amount should not be read in the same manner as for the 
other classes
5.4.13 Loans with Renegotiated Terms
Loans with renegotiated terms 2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount 409,987           247,822
Expected credit loss (15,732) -
Net carrying amount 394,615 247,822
The contractual terms of a loan may be modified 
for a number of reasons, including changing market conditions, customer retention and other factors not related to a current or potential credit deterioration of the customer.  An existing loan may be derecognised and the renegotiated loan recognised as a new loan at fair value in accordance with the accounting policy set out in Notes 5.4.
The Bank renegotiates loans to customers 
in financial difficulties to maximise collection opportunities and minimise the risk of default.  Under the Bank’s forbearance policy, loan forbearance is granted on a selective basis if the debtor is currently in default on its debt or if there is a high risk of default, there is evidence that the debtor made all reasonable efforts to pay under the original contractual terms and the debtor is expected to be able to meet the revised terms.
The revised terms usually include extending the 
maturity, changing the timing of interest payments and amending the terms of loan covenants. Both retail and corporate loans are subject to the forbearance policy.
For the purposes of disclosures in these financial 
statements, ‘loans with renegotiated terms’ are defined as loans that have been restructured 2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements60due to a deterioration in the borrower’s financial 
position, for which the Bank has made concessions by agreeing to terms and conditions that are more favourable for the borrower than the Bank had provided initially and that it would not otherwise consider.  A loan continues to be presented as part of loans with renegotiated terms until maturity, earlier repayment or until it is written off.
Irrespective of whether loans with renegotiated 
terms have been derecognised or not, they remain disclosed as impaired until there is sufficient evidence to demonstrate a significant reduction in the risk of non-payment of future cash flows and there are no other indicators of impairment.
When the contractual cash flows of a financial 
asset are renegotiated or otherwise modified, and the renegotiation or modification does not result in the derecognition of that financial asset, a bank shall recalculate the gross carrying amount of the financial asset and shall recognise a modification gain or loss in profit or loss. The gross carrying amount of the financial asset shall be recalculated as the present value of the renegotiated or modified contractual cash flows that are discounted at the financial asset’s original effective interest rate (or credit adjusted effective interest rate for purchased or originated credit-impaired financial assets).
Any costs or fees incurred in adjusting the carrying 
amount of the modified financial asset and are amortised over the remaining term of the modified financial asset.
5.4.14 Collateral Held and other Credit Enhancements, and their Financial Effect
The Bank holds collateral and other credit enhancements against most of its credit exposures. The Bank holds collateral against loans and advances to customers in the form of cash, mortgage interests over property, other registered securities over assets, and guarantees. Estimates of fair value are based on the value of collateral assessed at the time of borrowing and generally updated when a loan is individually assessed as impaired. Collateral generally is not held over Interbank placements, except when securities are held as part of reverse repurchase and securities borrowing activity.  Collateral usually is not held against investment securities, and no such collateral was held at 31 December 2021. An estimate of the fair value of collateral and other security enhancements held against loans and advances to customers is shown below:Loans and advances to customers
Collateral held and other credit enhancements, and their financial effect
2022 2021
Against individually impaired GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Property 1,423,374 666,908
Others 21,889 8,803
Against neither past due nor impaired
Property 3,330,020 1,166,036
Others
563,271 251,754
Total 5,338,554 2,093,501
i.          Loans and advances to customers
The general creditworthiness of a customer tends 
to be the most relevant indicator of credit quality of a loan extended to it (see Note 5(i).  However, collateral provides additional security and the Bank generally requests that borrowers provide it.  The Bank may take collateral in the form of a first charge over real estate, floating charges over all assets and other liens and guarantees.  The Bank routinely update the valuation of collateral held against all loans to customers according to Section 79(1) of Act 930. For impaired loans, the Bank obtains appraisals of collateral because the current value of the collateral is an input to the impairment measurement.
ii.     Other types of collateral and credit    
 enhancements
In addition to the collateral obtained for loans, the Bank also holds other types of collateral and credit enhancements such as second charges and floating charges for which specific values are not generally available.
iii.     Assets obtained by taking possession of   
 collateral
Repossessed items are not recognized in the bank’s books.  Proceeds from their sale are used to reduce related outstanding indebtedness.  The Bank has in its possession assets resulting from taking possession of collateral held as security against loans and advances at the reporting date (2021: nil). The carrying amount of the property are based on court judgments and valuation by the court.61         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements61Loans and advances to customers 
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Against 
individually impaired property462 56,390
iv.     Offsetting financial assets and financial liabilities
The Bank did not hold any financial assets and financial liabilities that are off-set in the statement of financial position at the reporting date.
The Bank monitors concentrations of credit risk by sector. An analysis of concentrations of credit risk from loans 
and advances, and investment securities is shown below.
Loans and Advances to customers
 Concentrations of Credit Risk
2022 2021
 Gross amount GH¢’000 % GH¢’000 %
 Concentration by industry:
 Agriculture 1,029,368 27.4 642,834 23.4
 Manufacturing 95,228 2.5 43,070 1.6
 Commerce & Finance 712,021 19.0 529,768 19.3
 Transport & communications 188,580 5.0 168,098 6.1
 Mining and quarrying 138,481 3.7 142 0.0
 Building & construction 479,165 12.8 358,122 13.0
 Services 1,111,352 29.6 1,003,353 36.5
 Electricity, GAS and water 0 0.0 0 0.0
 Total 3,754,196 100 2,745,387 100
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
a)Loans and advances to individual customers:Overdraft 129,032 99,251
Term loans
748,455 874,783
877,487 974,034
b)Loans to corporate entities:Overdrafts 437,400 448,861
Terms loans
2,439,309 1,322,492
Total 2,876,709 1,771,353
5.4.15  Concentrations of credit risk continued
Investment securities 
 These are investments in Government Treasury Bills, Notes and Bonds.
5.4.16   Regulatory Provisions
An account is considered to be in default when payment is not received on due date.  Accounts that are overdue 
by more than 90 days are considered delinquent.  These accounts are closely monitored and subjected to a 2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements62collection process.  The process used for provisions is based on Bank of Ghana guidelines which recognize 
cash as a credit mitigate.  Individual provisions are made for outstanding amounts depending on the number of days past due with full provisions made after 360 days.  In certain situations, such as bankruptcy, fraud and death, the loss recognition process is accelerated.  Loans and advances less than 90 days past due are generally not considered delinquent unless other information is available to indicate otherwise.
The Bank of Ghana Guideline is as set out below:
Grade Description Number of days Provisions (%)
Current Less than 30 days 1
Other Loans Exceptionally Mentioned (OLEM) 30 to less than 90 days 10
Substandard 90 to less than 180 days 25
Doubtful 180 to less than 360 days 50
Loss 360 days and above 100
5.5    Liquidity risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Bank is unable to meet its payment obligations associated with its financial 
liabilities when they fall due and be able to replace funds when they are withdrawn.  The consequence may be the failure to meet obligations to repay depositors and fulfil commitments to lend.
Management of liquidity risk
The Bank’s approach to managing liquidity is to ensure, as far as possible, that it will always have sufficient 
liquidity to meet its liabilities when due, under both normal and stressed conditions, without incurring unacceptable losses or risking damage to the Bank’s reputation.
The treasury department maintains a portfolio of short-term liquid assets, largely made up of short-term liquid 
investment securities, loans and advances to banks and other inter-bank facilities, to ensure that sufficient liquidity is maintained within the Bank as a whole.
Exposure to liquidity risk
The key measure used by the Bank for managing liquidity risk is the ratio of net liquid assets to deposits from 
customers.  For this purpose, net liquid assets are considered as including cash and cash equivalents and investment grade debt securities for which there is an active and liquid market less any deposits from banks, debt securities issued, other borrowings and commitments maturing within the next month.
For the definition of liquidity risk and information on how liquidity risk is managed by the Bank, Details of the 
reported Bank’s ratio of net liquid assets to deposits from customers at the reporting date and during the reporting 
period were as follows:
2022 2021
% %
At 31 December 86.11 1.87
Maximum for the period 86.11 16.73
Minimum for the period                                                                                  80.70 1.87
Average for the period 82.63 9.51
The table below presents the cash flows payable under non-derivative financial liabilities for managing liquidity 
risk by remaining contractual maturities at the date of the statement of financial position.  The amounts disclosed in the table are the contractual undiscounted cash flows however, the Bank manages the liquidity risk based on a different basis not resulting in a significantly different analysis63         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements632022Carrying 
AmountGross Nominal Up to 1 
Month1-3
Months 3 to 6 
Months 6 Months
to 1 Year1 to 5 
YearsOver 5 
Years Inflow/Outflow
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Financial liabilities by 
type
Non-derivative liabilitiesDeposits from customer 5,864,850 5,885,920 1,426,010 1,932,654 338,490 853,493 1,335,273 -
Borrowed Funds
588,438 642,720 132,766 144,126.15 10,000 86,696 120,543 148,588
Total financial liabilities 6,453,288 6,528,640 1,558,776 2,076,780 348,490 940,190 1,455,816 148,588
Financial assets 
by type
Cash and bank balance 1,908,837 1,908,837 1,908,837 - - - - -
Due from other Banks 349,720 383,719 - - - - 383,719 -
Investment securities 1,316,584 1,657,728 - 100,000 280,314 205,034 822,880 249,500
Investments (other than 
securities)134,729 136,756 - - - - -136,756.15
Loans and advances to customers3,242,188 3,754,196 805,255 1,926,611 198,404 333,226 370,121 120,578
Assets held for managing liquidity risk6,952,057 7,841,235 2,714,091 2,026,,611 478,719 538,260 1,576,720 506,834
Net Liquidity gap 498,789 1,312,595 1,155,315 (50,169) 130,229 (401,930) 120,903 358,246
 
2021Carrying 
AmountGross Nominal Up to 1 
Month1-3
Months 3 to 6 
Months 6 months 
to 1 years1 to 5 
yearsOver 5 
years Inflow/Outflow
 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Financial liabilities by type        
Non-derivative liabilities         
Deposits from customer 4,927,216        4,938,100 1,195,906     1,732,128 282,631     679,211  1,048,223             -   
Borrowed Funds
294,559 333,734 78,119  225       -   321 67,543 187,527 
Total financial liabilities 5,221,775 5,271,833 1,274,024 1,732,353 679,532 1,115,766  187,527 
         
Financial assets by type         
Cash and bank balance 924,619           924,619 924,619                 -                    -                -                -               -   
Due from other Banks 346,219           383,719                   
-                   -                    -                -       383,719             -   
Investment securities 2,400,655        2,400,655 198,891                 -   911,716     326,778     804,321     158,950 
Investments (other than securities)99,926             99,926 -                   -                    -                -         91,886             -   
Loans and advances to customers
2,282,312 2,745,387 667,992 198,094 246,148 155,356 1,238,790 239,007 
Assets held for managing liquidity risk6,053,731 6,554,306 1,791,502        198,094 1,157,864     482,134  2,518,715     397,957 
Net Liquidity gap 831,956 1,282,473 517,477 (1,534,259) 875,233 (197,398)  1,402,949     210,430 
5.6    Market Risk
 For the definition of market risk and information on the metrics (and their limitations) used by the Bank to manage      
the market risks of non-trading portfolios
5.6.1 Interest Rate Risk and Foreign currency risk
 The Bank uses the Reuters system to monitor live interest and exchange rates to facilitate trading by the treasury 
department.  This helps the Bank to know what is happening at any moment in time on the markets and where opportunities are present to make gains from higher interest rates. Interest rate risk is managed principally through monitoring interest rate gaps and by having pre-approved limits for reprising bands. The ALCO is the monitoring body for compliance with these limits and is assisted by Risk Management in its day-to-day monitoring activities.  A summary of the Bank’s interest rate gap position on non-trading portfolios is as follows:2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements64As at 31 December 2022Up to 1
Month1-3 
Months3 months less 
than 6 Months6 months
less than 1 1-5 
Years Over 5 
YearsTotal
Financial assets
Cash and cash equivalent 1,908,837 -                       -                    -                   -                     -   1,908,837
Investment in Government 
securities0 100,000.00       280,314    68,046 205,374 662,849 1,316,584
Loans and advances to customers (net)430,345 320,936 344,586 183,661 1,845,009 117,652 3,242,189
Total financial assets 2,339,182 420,935.63 624,899.94 251,707.21 2,050,383 780,501 6,467,609
Financial liabilities
Customer deposits 1,422,498 1,929,142 334,978 849,982 1,086,791 241,459 5,864,850
Borrowed funds 132,762 144,125.62         10,000.00 86,696 114,726 100,129 588,438
Total financial liabilities 1,555,260 2,073,268 344,978 936,678 1,201,517 341,57 6,453,288
Interest rate sensitivity gap 783,922 (1,652,332) 279,922 (684,971) 848,866 438,914 14,321
As at 31 December 2021Up to 1
Month1-3 
Months3 months
less than 6 
Months6 months
less than 1 1-5 
Years Over 5 
YearsTotal
Financial assetsCash and cash equivalent 924,619                    -                     -                   -                    -                -   924,619
Investment in Government securities 198,891 0 911,716 326,778 804,321 158,950 2,400,655
Loans and advances to customers (net)
296,767 146,011 1,203,567 238,107 188,549 209,311 2,282,312
Total financial assets 1,420,277 146,011 2,115,283 564,885 992,869 368,261 5,607,587
Financial liabilitiesCustomer deposits 1,194,382 1,727,348 279,172 678,328 857,647 190,561 4,927,438
Borrowed funds
78,119 216 0 305.83 62,376 135,359 277,618
Total financial liabilities 1,272,500 1,727,564 279,172 678,634 920,023 325,921 5,205,056
Interest rate sensitivity gap 147,777 (1,581,553) 1,836,111 -113,749 72,847 42,341 402,531
• Sensitivity analysis - Increase/decrease of 10% in net interest margin The interest rate risks sensitivity analysis 
is based on the following assumptions: 
• Changes in the market interest rates affect the interest income or expenses of variable financial instruments; 
• Changes in the market interest rates only affect interest income or expenses in relation to financial  instruments with fixed interest rates if these are recognised at their fair values;
• The interest rate changes will have an effect on interest sensitive assets and liabilities and hence simulation modelling is applied to financial instruments which are quoted at variable interest rates; and
• The projections make other assumptions including that all positions run to maturity.
The table below sets out the impact on current profit after taxation and equity of an incremental 10% parallel fall or rise on all yield curves at the beginning of the financial years beginning on 01 January 2022 and 01 January 2021 respectively.
2022 Scenario 1 Scenario 2
Base Effect of 10% increase in variable interest rate Effect of 10% decrease in variable interest rate
Profit after tax (371,280) (329,048)  (413,512)
Equity 658,191 700,422 615,959
2021 Scenario 1 Scenario 2
Base Effect of 10% increase in variable interest rate Effect of 10% decrease in variable interest rate
Profit after tax 81,602 129,635 33,570
Equity 938,784 986,817 890,572
Assuming no management actions an increase in interest rates would decrease the Bank’s loss after tax for the year by GH¢ 329,048 (2021: increase after tax by GH¢ 33,570) and increase equity by GH¢ 700,422 (2021: GH¢ 890,752), while a fall would increase loss after tax and equity by the same margins.
5.6.2 Foreign exchange risk
The Bank takes on exposure to the effects of fluctuations in the prevailing foreign currency exchange rates on its financial position and cash flows.  65         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements65The Board sets limits on the level of exposure by currency and in aggregate. 
The table below summarises the Bank’s exposure to foreign currency exchange rate risk at 31 December 2022.  
The amounts stated in the table below are the Ghana Cedi equivalent of the foreign currencies.
As at 31 December 2022 USD     GBP    EUR Other Total 
Assets GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 
Cash and Cash Equivalent 322, 767 19,604 32,309 0 374,680
Loans and advances to customers (net) 459,315 0 281,706 0 741,022 
Investment Securities 43,195 0 213 0 43,408 
Other assets 28,765 12 0 0 28,776 
Total financial assets 854,042 19,616 314,228 0 1,187,886
Liabilities
Deposits from customers 573,022 31,728 49,559 1,132 655,440 
Borrowings 19,771 0 191,594 0  211,364 
Other liabilities 147,145 35 40 168 147,388
Total financial liabilities 739,938 31,763 241,193 1,301 1,014,194
Net on balance sheet position 114,104 (12,147) 73,036 (1,301) 173,692
Contingent liabilities (2022) 280,590 - 0 0 280,590 
As at 31 December 2021 USD     GBP    EUR Other Total
Total financial assets 471,958 22,199 224,296 0 718,453
Total financial liabilities                                            466,204 18,453 202,473 848 687,978
Net on balance sheet position 5,754 3,746 21,823 -848 30,475
- - - - -
Contingent liabilities (2021) 109,024 218 424 0 109,666
The following mid inter-bank exchange rates were applied during the year:
Average Rate Reporting Rate
2021 2021 2021 2021
 Cedis to US$ 1 8.2781 5.8137 8.5760 6.0061
 GBP 1 10.0918 7.2521 10.3118 8.1272
 EUR 1 8.6280 6.4437 9.1457 6.8281
Sensitivity Analysis on Currency Risks
The following table shows the effect of the strengthening or weakening of the GH¢ against all other currencies on the company’s income statement.  This sensitivity analysis indicates the potential impact on the income statements based upon the foreign currency exposures recorded at 31 December 2022.  (See “currency risk” above) and it does not represent actual or future gains or losses.
A strengthening/weakening of the GH¢ by 5% against the following currencies at 31 December 2022 would have 
increased/decreased equity and income statement by the amounts shown below:
This analysis assumes that all other variables, in particular interest rates, remain constant.2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements662022 2021
Income 
Statement/
Equity Impact Income 
Statement/
Equity 
Impact Income 
Statement/Equity 
Impact Income 
Statement/
Equity 
Impact 
Change Strengthening Weakening Change Strengthening Weakening
In GH¢’000
US$ 5% 81 (81) 5% (94) 94
£ 5% 607 (607) 5% (187) 187
€ 5% (1,137) 1,137 5% (238) 238
2022 2021
Income 
Statement/
Equity Impact Income 
Statement/
Equity 
Impact Income 
Statement/Equity 
Impact Income 
Statement/
Equity 
Impact 
Change Strengthening Weakening Change Strengthening Weakening
In GH¢’000US$ 5% 60 (60) 5% (71) 71
£ 5% 456       (456) 5% (140) 140
€ 5%                     (853)          853 5% (178) 178
Market Risk
All trading instruments are subject to market risk, the risk that future changes in market conditions may make an instrument less valuable or more onerous.  The instruments are recognised at fair value, and all changes in market directions directly affect net trading income.
Exposure to market risk is formally managed in accordance with risk limits set by senior management by buying 
or selling instruments or entering into offsetting positions.
5.6.3  Cashflow sensitivity analysis for variable rate instruments 
A change of 100 basis points in interest rates at the reporting date will have increased/decreased profit or loss by amounts shown below.  Each analysis assumes all other variables in particular foreign currency rates remain constant. 
The analysis is performed on the same basis for 2022.
Effects in Cedis 100bp 100bp
Increase Decrease
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
31-Dec-22
Average for the Period 4,223 (4,223)
Maximum for the Period 8,924 (8,924)
Minimum for the Period 4,701 (4,701)67         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements6731-Dec-21
Average for the Period 4,803 (4,803)
Maximum for the Period 7,282 (7,282)
Minimum for the Period 2,479 (2,479)
The Bank’s operations are subject to the risk of interest rate fluctuations to the extent that interest earning 
assets (including investments) and interest-bearing liabilities mature or re-price at different times or in differing amounts.  In the case of floating rate assets and liabilities the Bank is also exposed to basis risk, which is the difference between re-pricing characteristics of the various floating rate indices, such as the savings rate and six months LIBOR and different types of interest.  Risk management activities are aimed at optimizing net interest income, given market interest rate levels consistent with the Bank’ s strategies.
Asset-liability risk management activities are conducted in the context of the Bank’s sensitivity to interest rate changes.  The actual effect will depend on a number of factors, including the extent to which repayments are made earlier to later than the contracted dates and variations in interest rate sensitivity within re-pricing periods and amongst currencies.
The rates above show the extent to which the Bank’s interest rate exposures on assets and liabilities are 
matched.  These are allocated to time bands by reference to the earlier of the next contractual interest rate re-pricing date and maturity.
5.7     CAPITAL MANAGEMENT
5.7.1    Regulatory Capital
The Central Bank of Ghana sets and monitors capital requirements for the Bank.
The Bank’s objectives when managing capital are:
• To safeguard the Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern so that it can continue to provide returns for 
the shareholders and benefits for the other stakeholders
• To maintain a strong capital base to support the current and future development needs of the business
• To comply with the capital requirements set by the Central Bank of Ghana
Capital adequacy and use of regulatory capital are monitored by management employing techniques based on the guidelines developed by the Central Bank of Ghana for supervisory purposes. The required information is filed with the Central Bank of Ghana on a monthly basis
The Central Bank requires each bank to:
a. Hold the minimum level of regulatory capital of GH¢400 million. 
b. Maintain a ratio of total regulatory capital; to risk weighted assets plus risk weighted off balance assets at 
above the required minimum of 10%
The Bank’s regulatory capital is analysed into two tiers:
• Tier 1 capital, which includes equity share capital, share premium, perpetual bonds (which are classified as 
innovative Tier 1 securities), retained earnings, translation reserve and minority interests after deductions for goodwill and intangible assets, and other regulatory adjustments relating to items that are included in equity but are treated differently for capital adequacy purposes Tier 2 capital, which includes capitalised revaluations reserves, latent revaluation reserves, undisclosed reserves, revaluation reserves, subordinated Loans and Hybrid Capital subject to a limit of 100% of Tier 1 Capital.
The Bank’s policy is to maintain a strong capital base so as to maintain investor, creditor and market confidence and to sustain future development of the business.  The impact of the level of capital on shareholders’ return is also recognised and the Bank recognises the need to maintain a balance between the higher returns that might be possible with greater gearing and the advantages and security afforded by a sound capital position.
5.7.2    Capital adequacy ratio
The capital adequacy ratio is the quotient of the capital base of the Bank and the Bank’s risk-weighted asset base. In accordance with Central Bank of Ghana regulations, a minimum ratio of 10% is to be maintained
The Bank’s regulatory capital position at 31 December 2022, was as follows:2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements682022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Tier 1 Capital
Ordinary share capital 698,700 698,700
Retained earnings (419,119) (236,645)
Statutory reserve 182,015 182,015
Other regulatory adjustment (277,463) (235,999)
CET1 Capital after Deductions (B) 184,133 408,071.49
Fair Value Reserves 84,417 58,356
Revaluation reserve 109,209 28,766
Disallowed (limited to 3% of RWA) (66,813) (21,775)
Tier 2 Capital 126,814 65,347
Total Regulatory Capital (Tier 1 + Tier 2) 310,946 473,418
Credit risk
Risk weighted assetsOn-balance sheet items 3,454,590 2,559,977
Off-balance sheet items 181,588 49,354
1.4 Credit Risk Reserve (CRR) 245,351 178,298
1.5 Total Credit Risk Equivalent Weighted Asset (RWA) 3,390,826 2,431,033
Operational Risk 821,484 821,484
Market Risk 14,813 14,813
Total Credit Risk Equivalent Weighted Asset (RWA) 4,227,122 3,267,329
Section C: Risk ratios1. Risk-based capital ratios1.1 Common Equity Tier 1 / RWA 4.36 12.49
1.2 Additional Tier 1 / RWA -
1.3 Tier 1 / RWA 4.36 12.49
1.4 Tier 2 / RWA 3.00 2.00
1.5 Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) 7.36 14.49
5.7.3  REVIEW OF CAPITAL ADEQUACY RATIO
The allocation of capital between specific operations and activities is, to a large extent, driven by optimization 
of the return achieved on the capital allocated.  The amount of capital allocated to each operation or activity is based primarily upon the regulatory capital, but in some cases the regulatory requirements do not reflect fully the varying degree of risk associated with different activities.  In such cases the capital requirements may be flexed to reflect differing risk profiles, subject to the overall level of capital to support a particular operation or activity not falling below the minimum required for regulatory purposes.  The process of allocating capital to specific operations and activities is undertaken independently by the Bank Credit Committee and or ALCO as appropriate.
Although maximization of the return on risk-adjusted capital is the principal basis used in determining how 
capital is allocated within the Bank to particular operations or activities, it is not the sole basis used for decision making. Account also is taken of synergies with other operations and activities, the availability of management and other resources, and the fit of the activity with the Bank’s longer-term strategic objectives.  The Bank’s policies in respect of capital management and allocation are reviewed regularly by the Board of Directors.
5.7.4    MINIMUM CAPITAL REQUIREMENT
In accordance with Section 28 (1) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930), the Bank of Ghana (BOG) increased the minimum capital requirement for commercial banks from GH¢ 120 million to GH¢ 400 million.69         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements69The Directive required all Banks to comply with the new capital requirement by the end of December 2018.  Non-
compliance with the new minimum paid up capital requirement shall be dealt with in accordance with section 33 of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).
• Banks are required to meet the new capital requirements using either of the following methods:
• Fresh capital injection;
• Capitalisation of retained earnings; and
• A combination of fresh capital injection and capitalisation of retained earnings.
6.      FAIR VALUES OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
The fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities that are traded in active markets are based on quoted market prices or dealer price quotations.  For all other financial instruments, the Bank determines fair values using other valuation techniques.
For financial instruments that trade infrequently and have little price transparency, fair value is less objective, 
and requires varying degrees of judgment depending on liquidity, concentration, uncertainty of market factors, pricing assumptions and other risks affecting the specific instrument.
a.
       Valuation models
The Bank measures fair values using the following fair value hierarchy, which reflects the significance of the inputs used in making the measurements.
Level 1: Inputs that are quoted market prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical instruments..Level 2: Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable either directly (i.e. as prices) 
or indirectly (i.e. derived from prices).  This category includes instruments valued using: quoted market prices in active markets for similar instruments; quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are considered less than active; or other valuation techniques in which all significant inputs are directly or indirectly observable from market data.
Level 3: Inputs that are unobservable. This category includes all instruments for which the valuation technique 
includes inputs not based on observable data and the unobservable inputs have a significant effect on the instrument’s valuation.  This category includes instruments that are valued based on quoted prices for similar instruments for which significant unobservable adjustments or assumptions are required to reflect differences between the instruments.
Valuation techniques include net present value and discounted cash flow models, comparison with similar 
instruments for which market observable prices exist and other valuation models.  Assumptions and inputs used in valuation techniques include risk-free and benchmark interest rates, credit spreads and other premia used in estimating discount rates and foreign currency exchange rates and expected price volatilities and correlations.
The objective of valuation techniques is to arrive at a fair value measurement that reflects the price that would 
be received to sell the asset or paid to transfer the liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
Observable prices or model inputs are usually available in the market for listed debt and equity securities, 
exchange-traded derivatives and simple over-the-counter derivatives such as interest rate swaps.
Availability of observable market prices and model inputs reduces the need for management judgement and 
estimation and also reduces the uncertainty associated with determining fair values.  Availability of observable market prices and inputs varies depending on the products and markets and is prone to changes based on specific events and general conditions in the financial markets.
b. Financial instruments measured at fair value – fair value hierarchy
The following table analyses financial instruments measured at fair value at the reporting date, by the level in the fair value hierarchy into which the fair value measurement is categorised. The amounts are based on the values recognised in the statement of financial position.
2022 Total
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 fair value
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Investment (Other than Securities) - 134,729 - 134,729
- 134,729 - 134,7292022 Annual Report & Financial Statements702021 Total
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 fair value
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Investment (Other than Securities) - 99,926 - 99,926
- 99,926 - 99,926
Equity instruments  - Investment (Other than Securities)
The bank has equity in non-listed entities, the investment is initially recognized at transaction price and re-measured (to the extent information is available) and valued on case by case basis. The fair values of equity instruments are determined using market proxy.
2022 Core range of inputs
GH¢’000
Level 2 AssetsGH¢’000Valuation TechniqueSignificant unobservableinputs  Low High Unit
Equity134,729 Market Proxy
EV/EBITDA proxyPrice /Book proxy10.5 
0.611.51.2Basis pointBasis point
2021 Core range of inputs
GH¢’000
Level 2 
AssetsGH¢’000Valuation TechniqueSignificant unobservableinputs  Low High Unit
Equity 100,631Market Proxy
EV/EBITDA proxyPrice /Book proxy11.9
0.6514.91.57Basis pointBasis point
c. Fair value of financial instruments not measured at fair value
Set out below is a comparison, by class, of the carrying amounts and fair values of the Bank’s financial instruments 
that are not carried at fair value in the financial statements. This table does not include the fair values of non–
financial assets and non–financial liabilities:
2022 Fair Value
In GH¢'000 Carrying Value Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Financial assets: 
Due from other Banks 349,720 - - 383,719 383,719
Investment securities 1,316,584 485,348 1,172,380 1,657,728
Loans and advances to customers 3,242,188 - 3,263,496 490,699 3,754,196
4,908,493 0 3,748,845 2,046,798 5,795,642
Financial liabilities Borrowed funds
588,438 - 373,589 269,131 642,720
2021 Fair Value
In GH¢'000 Carrying Value Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Financial assets: Due from other Banks 346,219 - - 383,719 383,719
Investment securities 2,400,655 1,238,494 794,489 2,032,983
Loans and advances to customers
2,282,312 - 1,267,590 1,477,797 2,745,38771         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements715,029,186 0 2,506,084 2,656,005 5,162,089
Financial liabilities 
Borrowed funds 294,559 0 78,664 255,069 333,734
Any other financial instruments not disclosed on the table above have their carrying amount approximate to the 
fair value.
Due from other Banks
The fair values of these instrument are estimated by a discounted cash flow model based on contractual cash flows using estimated yields incorporating the counterparties’ credit risk.
Loans and advances to customers
The fair values of loans and advances are estimated by discounted cash flow models that incorporate assumptions for credit risks, foreign exchange risk, probability of default and loss given default estimates.
Borrowed funds
The fair value of borrowed funds is estimated by a discounted cash flow model using market rate for similar instruments trading in the market.
7a.      OPERATING SEGMENTS
Operating segmentsSegment information is presented in respect of the Bank’s business segments. The primary format, business segments, is based on the Bank’s management and internal reporting structure.  
Business segments pay and receive interest to and from the Central Treasury on an arm’s length basis to reflect 
the borrowing from or placement into the pool of investments.
Segment capital expenditure is the total cost incurred during the period to acquire property and equipment and 
intangible assets other than goodwill.
The Bank does not have reliance on a single major customer. The total revenue of the Bank during the year 
was not earned from transactions with a single external customer. No single customer contributed 10 per cent or more of an entity’s revenues.
Business segments
The Bank has the following main business segments:
• Corporate Banking: includes loans, deposits and other transactions and balances with corporate customers including the Agricultural sector.
• Retail Banking: includes loans, deposits and other transactions and balances with retail customers.
• Central Treasury: undertakes the Bank’s funding and centralized risk management activities through borrowings, issues of debt securities for risk management purposes and investing in liquid assets such as short-term placements and corporate and government debt securities.
The Bank also has a central Shared Services operation that provides support services to the above-mentioned segments, manages the Bank’s premises and certain corporate costs.  Cost-sharing agreements are used to 
allocate central costs to business segments on a reasonable basis.
2022Corporate 
BankingRetail 
BankingCentral 
TreasuryShared 
Services 
UnallocatedConsolidated
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Net Interest Income 90,851 41,441 352,512    - (62,488) 422,317 
Net fee and commission income 11,019 86,287 4,399 - (5,927) 95,779 
Net trading income 7,034 59,434 50,806 - 5,579 122,854 
Other operating income 440 48 -   - 6,257 6,745 
Inter segment revenue (15,173) 405,979 (390,806) -   - -   
Total segment revenue 94,172     593,190 16,911 (56,578) 647,695 
Segment result
Income tax expense -   -   -   - (6,922) (6,922)
Profit for the period 56,636 321,473 (362,269) - (387,120) (371,280)2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements72Total assets 2,496,099 746,090 3,575,140 - 595,391 7,412,720 
Total Segment liabilities 1,339,514 4,452,105 70,958 - 891,952 6,754,530 
Impairment losses on financial assets (17,819) (25,233) (25,233) - (12,012) (430,212)
Depreciation and amortisation (2,961) (20,876) (561) - (33,984) (58,382)
Capital expenditure (205) (13,150) (241) - (19,677) (33,273)
2021Corporate 
BankingRetail 
BankingCentral 
TreasuryShared 
Services Unallocated Consolidated
 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Net Interest Income 38,067 68,763 389,377 (15,881) -       480,326 
Net fee and commission income 14,123 72,846 1,967 2,268                  -         91,203 
Net trading income 2,880 15,934 37,061 -                    -         55,874 
Other operating income 377 57 -   11,978                  -         12,412 
Inter segment revenue 9,120 239,506 (248,626) -                    -                -   
Total segment revenue 64,567 397,105 179,778 (1,635)                  -       639,815 
Segment result                   -   
Income tax expense -   -   -   (44,494)                  -        (44,494)
Profit for the period 16,297 190,370 176,407 (301,472)                  -         81,602 
                   -   
Total assets 887,582 1,394,730 3,671,493 500,314 -    6,454,119 
                   -   
Total Segment liabilities 1,339,514 3,487,471 70,958 323,831         294,089  5,515,864 
Impairment losses on financial assets (31,814) (9,967) -   -                  -        (41,781)
Depreciation and amortisation (2,680) (19,121) (500) (44,644)                  -        (66,946)
Capital expenditure (205) (13,150) (241) (21,984)                  -        (35,579)
7b.   INTEREST INCOME                    
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Loans and advances 452,446 296,705
Investment in Government securities                                                                            343,315 359,215
Inter bank placement 54,546 49,713
Leases (including agric inputs) 42,060 22,602
892,367 728,235
7c.  INTEREST INCOME ANALYSIS
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Interest revenue calculated using effective interest method 850,307 705,633
Other interest and similar income 42,060 22,602
892,367 728,235
8.   INTEREST EXPENSE
a.   On deposits:
2022 2021
Interest expense calculated using effective interest method GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Fixed/time deposits 81,912 59,762
Savings deposits 12,704 12,176
Demand & call deposits 273,622 152,453
Total interest expense on deposits 368,238 224,39173         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements73b.   On borrowed funds:
2022 2021
Inter-Bank Borrowing 13,973 540
Long-Term Borrowings 23,729 9,348
Interest and exchange on lease liability 64,109 13,631
101,811 23,519
Total Expense (a+b) 470,049 247,909
9.  NET FEE AND COMMISSION INCOME
2022 2021
Fee and commission Income GH¢ ‘000 GH¢ ‘000
Commission on Turnover 23,151 23,633
Fees and Charges 87,956 75,292
Sale of Cheque Book Charges 1,380 1,169
Guarantees Charges & Commission 1,223 1,225
Total Fee and Commission Income 113,710 101,319
Fee and commission expense
2022 2021
Cost of Services (17,931) (10,116)
Total Fee and Commission Expense (17,931) (10,116)
Net Fee and Commission Income 95,779 91,203
All fees and commission income were earned at a point in time.
10.   NET TRADING INCOME
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Foreign Exchange
Translation gains less losses 91,554 15,730
Transaction gains less losses 31,300 40,144
122,854 55,874
11.  OTHER OPERATING INCOME
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Bad debts recovered  3,261                        4,263
Other income* 3,484 8,149
Total 6,745 12,412
* Other income is made up of unutilized provisions on expenses                       
12.   IMPAIRMENT LOSS ON FINANCIAL ASSETS                                                         
The table below shows the Expected Credit Loss charges on financial instruments for the year recorded in the 
income statement:
2022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Letter of credit and guarantee 5,167 - - 5,167
Undrawn commitments 965 - - 9652022 Annual Report & Financial Statements74Bills and Bonds 341,145 341,145
Due from Banks 34,003 - - 34,003
Loans and advances 33,864 19,928 (4,860) 48,932
At 31 December 2022 415,144 19,928 (4,860) 430,212
*the ECL on Bills and Bonds is due to the impact of the Domestic Debt Exchange Program (DDEP)
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Letter of credit and guarantee (16,847) - - (16,847)
Undrawn commitments (6,236) - - (6,236)
Due from Banks 375 - - 375
Loans and advances (13,990) 27,114 51,366 64,490
 At 31 December 2021 (36,698) 27,114 51,366 41,781
13.   PERSONNEL EXPENSES
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Salaries and wage 156,349 129,231
Pension costs - (Defined contribution scheme to SSNIT) 17,204 14,225
Staff Provident Fund (Defined Contribution Scheme) 9,975 8,238
Staff fuel expenses 69,856 39,529
Medical expenses 13,129 9,472
Canteen expenses 13,622 10,690
Training expenses 977 738
Uniform                                                                                                                                                                                                              26,113 21,537
Other staff related costs 28,804 16,621
336,029 250,281
*Other staff related costs comprise insurance expenses on personnel, discount on staff loans and others.The number of 
persons employed by the Bank at the year-end was 1,482 (2021: 1,481).
14.   OTHER OPERATING EXPENSES
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Occupancy Cost 21,973 20,708
Auditors Remuneration 1,253 1,100
Donations and Social Responsibility 786 1,094
Motor Vehicle Running Expenses 17,879 10,684
General and Administrative Expenses 38,875 39,461
Information Technology Expenses                                                                         79,277 58,183
Others* 27,388 23,481
Total 187,431 154,711
Others* consist of deposit insurance premium and clearing house expenses
15.    DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Depreciation of Property, Plant and equipment 15,421 13,81375         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements75Amortisation of intangible 10,010 13,469
Depreciation of Right of use asset 32,951 39,664
Total 58,382 66,946
16.   EARNINGS PER SHARE
Earnings per share is calculated by dividing the net profit attributable to equity holders of the Bank by the weighted 
average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
(Loss) / Profit after tax     (371,280) 81,602
Number of equity shares (‘000) 346,952 346,952
Weighted average number of shares (‘000) 346,952 346,952
Earnings per share:
Basic (Ghana pesewas)                                                                                                        (107.01) 23.5
Diluted (Ghana pesewas) (107.01) 23.5
17.   CASH AND BANK BALANCE
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
(i)     Cash on hand 295,328 188,902
Balances with Bank of Ghana 1,365,581 570,969
Nostro Balances 90,101 65,670
Deposits and balances due from banking 
institution 157,827 99,079
Cash and bank balance 1,908,837 924,619
* Included in balances with bank of Ghana is mandatory reserve of GH¢ 703,782 (2021 GH¢ 394,197)**Included in the Nostro balance is a restricted amount of GH¢ 25,304 (2021: GH¢ 11,833), these restricted Nostro amounts have been excluded from cash and cash equivalents in note 29.
18.   DUE FROM OTHER BANKS
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Placements with other banks 387,219 349,716
Less: Write off - -
Allowance for impairment losses (37,500) (3,497)
349,719 346,219
  The credit risk quality of due from other banks is disclosed in note 19.
19.    CREDIT RISK QUALITY OF DUE FROM BANKS BALANCES
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk based on the Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of impairment allowances.2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements7619.1    CREDIT RISK QUALITY OF DUE FROM BANKS BALANCES
2022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Performing
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 387,219 - - 387,219
Grade 4-5 (387,219) (387,219) - -
Non-performing - - - -
Grade 6 - - - -
Grade 7 - - - -
Grade 8  -  -  -  -
At 31 December 2022 - 387,219  - 387,219
2021 :  GROSS AMOUNT Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Performing - - - -
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 349,716 - - 349,716
Grade 4-5 - - - 0
Non-performing - - - 0
Grade 6 - - - 0
Grade 7 - - - 0
Grade 8 - - - -
At 31 December 2021 349,716 - - 349,716
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to due from banks measured at amortised cost is, as 
follows:
2022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2022 349,716 -  -  349,716
New assets originated or purchased -   -  - -   
Interest accrued - 37,500 37,500
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)-   - - -   
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 2 -   -   - -   
Transfers to Stage 3 (349,716) 349,716 - -
At 31 December 2022
0 387,219 - 387,219
 2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021 312,220 - - 312,220
New assets originated or purchased - - - -
Interest accrued 37,496 - - 37,496
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)- - - -
Transfers to Stage 1 -  - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2021
349,716 - - 349,716
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to due from banks is, as follows:77         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements772022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2022 3,498 - - 3,498
New assets originated or purchased 0 34,003 - 34,003
Transfers to Stage 1 -   - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 (3,498) 3,498 - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
Written off/ recovery - - - -
At 31 December 2022 0 37,500 0 37,500
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021 3,123 - - 3,123
New assets originated or purchased - - - -
Interest accrued 375 375
Transfers to Stage 1 -   - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 -   - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
Written off/ recovery - - - -
At 31 December 2021 3,498 - - 3,498
20.   INVESTMENT SECURITIES
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Treasury bills  (a)
14 Day Treasury Bills 0 198,891
56 Day Treasury Bills                                                                          - -
91 Day Treasury Bills                                                                                                                           100,000 -
182 Day Treasury Bills 280,314 911,716
Treasury Notes 68,046 326,778
448,361 1,437,385
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Government bonds (b)
2-5-year fixed rate notes 205,374 804,320
Above 5 years fixed rate note 662,849 158,950
868,223 963,270
Total (a+b) 1,316,584 2,400,655
Maturing within 90 days of date of acquisition 100,000 198,891
Maturing between 90 days - 1 year of date of 
acquisition          348,360 1,238,494
Maturing above 5 years of date of acquisition 868,223 963,271
1,316,584 2,400,655
Government bonds as well as Treasury Bills are classified as financial assets at amortized cost as the business model is to hold the financial assets to collect contractual cash flows representing solely payments of principal and interest.
The average interest rate on treasury bills at 31 December 2022 was 23.44% (2021: 12.11%) and the rate for 
treasury bonds at 31 December 2022 was 35.36% (2021: 24.75%).2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements78 20.(iii)   Ghana Debt Exchange Program                 
On 5th December 2022, the Government of Ghana launched Ghana’s Domestic Debt Exchange programme, 
an invitation for the voluntary exchange of approximately GHS137 billion of the domestic notes and bonds of the Republic, including E.S.L.A. and Daakye bonds, for a package of New Bonds to be issued by the Republic. The Exchange excludes Treasury Bills in totality, and notes and bonds held by individuals (natural persons). 
The Ghana Debt Exchange Program resulted in direct and indirect additional impairment on bonds amounting  
broken down as follows:
S/N Description    Impairment Charge (Ghc’000) 
1 GoG Bonds                           331,180 
2  Local dollar bonds                               6,432 
3 Cocoa bills                               3,532 
4  Due from other banks                              34, 003 
Total                             375,147          
Net carrying amount of bonds impaired by the GDDEP is analyzed below:
   GoG 
Bonds   GoG 
Bills  Local Dollar 
Bonds Cocoa 
Bills Total 
  GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 
Gross  Carrying Amount 1,234,534 100,000 42,880 280,314 1,657,728 
Impairment (331,180) - (6,432) (3,532) (341,144) 
Net Carrying Amount 903,354 100,000 36,448 276,782 1,316,584 
20.1.     CREDIT RISK QUALITY OF INVESTMENT SECURITIES (DEBT INSTRUMENT)
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk of investment Securities (Debt 
Instruments) measured at amortised cost based on the Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of impairment allowances.
2022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 1,316,584 - - 1,316,584
Grade 4-5 (1,316,584) 1,316,584 - 1,316,584
Grade 6 - - - -
Grade 7 - - - -
Grade 8 - - - -
At 31 December 2022 0 1,316,584 - 1,316,584
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 2,400,655 0 0 2,400,655
Grade 4-5 - - - 0
Grade 6 - - - 0
Grade 7 - - - 0
Grade 8 - - - 0
At 31 December 2021 2,400,655 0 0 2,400,655
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to Debt instruments measured at amortised cost is, as follows:79         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements792022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2022 2,400,654 - - 2,400,654
New assets originated or purchased 1,418,858 - - 1,418,858
Interest accrued 360,357 - - 360,357
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(2,522,141) - - (2,522,141)
Expected Credit Less (ECL) (341,145) (341,145)
Transfers to Stage 1 - -
Transfers to Stage 2 (2,400,654) 2,400,654 -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2022 (742,926) 2,059,510 - 1,316,584
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 20212,222,139 - - 2,222,139
New assets originated or purchased 10,067,285 - - 10,067,285
Interest accrued 371,432 - - 371,432
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)(10,260,200) - -(10,260,200)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3
- - - -
At 31 December 2021 2,400,654 - - 2,400,654
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to Debt instruments measured at amortised cost is, as follows: 
Instruments under this category were issued by the central bank and government.
21.   LOANS AND ADVANCES TO CUSTOMERS
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢ ’000
Overdrafts 601,499 527,209
Loans 2,809,625 2,166,826
Lease receivable 343,072 51,352
Gross loans and advances 3754,196 2,745,387
Provision for impaired loans and advances
- Specific (411,002)                        (392,072)
- Collective (101,005)                          (71,003)
Total ECL (512,007)
3,242,189 2,282,312
 The above constitute loans and advances to customers and staff. 
           Staff loans amounted to GH¢ 116,250 (2021: GH¢69,302).2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements80  The investment in lease receivables is analyzed as follows:
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Less than 1 year 30,854 27,319
Between 1 year and 5 years 312,217 142,480
343,071 169,799
Key ratios on loans and advances
• The total impairment for the year represents 12.72%  of gross loans at the year-end (2021: 16.87%)
• Loan loss provision ratio is 12.72%  of gross advances (2021: 16.87%)
• Gross Non-performing loans ratio per Bank of Ghana requirement is 29.74% (2021:31.21%)
• Total gross non-performing loans is  GHS 1,197,166 (this includes interest in suspense of GHS 271,574)
•  Fifty (50) largest exposures (gross funded and non-funded) to total exposures is 59.96% (2021: 51.56%)
2022 2021
a) Analysis by maturity GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Maturing within one year                                                                     2,930,270 1,112,234
Between one to five years 703,348 1,394,146
More than five years 120,578 239,007
3,754,196 2,745,387
Impairment of loans and advances
2022 2021
At 1 January 463,075 406,376
Additional impairment charge during the year 48,932             64,490
Write off                                                                                                                                - (7,791)
512,007 463,075
The table below shows an analysis of the gross loans and advances based the class of financial assets
    2022 STAGE 1 STAGE 2 STAGE 3 Total 
 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 
Agric              746,828                30,624        249,163  1,026,616  
Corporate              648,957              806,793        394,344  1,850,094  
Retail    735,603   9,802  132,082   877,486   
Total 2,131,387   847,219   775,589   3,754,196   
  GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 
Agric Loans 337,316 24,257 189,777 551,349 
Retail loans 596,871 9,904 105,976 712,751 
Corporate loans 738,269 344,002 399,016 1,481,287 
 Total 1,672,456 378,163 694,769 2,745,388 
21.1. Impairment allowance for loans and advances to customers measured at amortised cost
21.1.1 Expected credit losses on loans and advances
 The table below shows an analysis of the gross loans and advances based the class of financial assets.81         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements812022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
Description GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Agric Loans 11,875 1,681 166,230 179,785
Retail loans 444 20 130,932 131,397
Corporate loans 17,259 69,726 113,840 200,825
Total 29,578 71,427 411,002 512,007
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
Description GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Agric Loans 4,277 4,140 141,743 150,160
Retail loans 1,170 77 105,837 107,084
Corporate loans 15,137 46,202 144,492 205,831
Total 20,584 50,419 392,072 463,075
The table below shows an analysis of the expected credit losses on loans and advances based the class of financial 
assets.
21.2 CREDIT RISK QUALITY OF LOANS AND ADVANCE
21.2.1   Agric loans
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk of Agric loans based on the Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of impairment allowances.
2022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 598,254 - - 598,254
Grade 4-5 - 167,226 - 167,226
Grade 6 - - 53,413 53,413
Grade 7 - - 158 158
Grade 8 - - 207,565 207,565
At 31 December 2022 598,254 167,226 261,136 1,026,616
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 337,316 - - 337,316
Grade 4-5 - 24,257 - 24,257
Grade 6 - - 2,827 2,827
Grade 7 - - 1,530 1,530
Grade 8 - - 185,420 185,420
At 31 December 2021 337,316 24,257 189,777 551,349
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to Agric loan is as follows:
2022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3   Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2022337,316             24,257         189,777       551,349
New assets originated or purchased 404,994               7,863                 -         412,857
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)(144,055) 135,106 
        71,359 62,409 
At 31 December 2022 598,254 167,226 261,136 1,026,6162022 Annual Report & Financial Statements822021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2021   278,897     17,053    153,732 449,682 
New assets originated or purchased    66,602       3,226 -   69,828 
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)   (8,183)       3,978      36,045 31,839 
At 31 December 2021
337,316 24,257 189,777 551,349
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to Agric loan is, as follows:
2022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 20224,277 4,140 141,743 150,160
New assets originated or purchased 5504
- - 5,504
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)2,093 (2,459)         24,487    24,121
At 31 December 2022
11,875 1,681 166,230 179,785
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3   Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 20213,648 5,507 195,682 204,837
New assets originated or purchased 1,248 - - 1,248
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)(619)          (1,367)         (53,939) (55,925)
At 31 December 2021
4,277 4,140 141,743 150,160
21.2.2  Corporate loans
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk of Corporate loans based on the Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of impairment allowances.
2022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 632,207 - - 632,207
Grade 4-5 - 620,464 - 620,464
Grade 6: - - 278,563 278,563
Grade 7 - - 108,295 108,295
Grade 8  -  - 210,564 210,564
At 31 December 2022 632,207 620,464 597,423 1,850,094
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 738,269 - - 738,269
Grade 4-5 - 344,002 - 344,002
Grade 6: - - 34,237 34,237
Grade 7 - - 99,679 99,679
Grade 8 - - 265,099 265,099
At 31 December 2021 738,269 344,002 399,016 1,481,287
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to Corporate loan is, as follows:83         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements832022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2022738,269 344,002 399,016 1,481,287
New assets originated or purchased 373,408 436,266  - 809,674
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)(479,470) (159,805) (198,407)     (440,867)
Transfers to Stage 1 -   - -   0
Transfers to Stage 2 - - -   0
Transfers to Stage 3 -   - -   0
Amount written off
- - - 0
At 31 December 2022 632,207 620,464 597,423 1,850,094
2021  Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3  Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021        738,269            344,002 399,016 1,481,287
New assets originated or purchased         179,226              59,344 - 238,569
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)      (179,226)            (59,344) - -238,569
Transfers to Stage 1 -   -   -   0
Transfers to Stage 2 -   -   -   0
Transfers to Stage 3 -   -   - 0
Amount written off - - 
- 0
At 31 December 2021 738,269 344,002 399,016 1,481,287
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to Corporate loan is, as follows:
2022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 202215,137 46,202 144,492 205,831
New assets originated or purchased 34,142 -   -   34,142
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)(32,020)             23,524         (28,860)       (39,148)
Re -measurement of loss allowance -   -   -   -   
Transfers to Stage 1 -   -   
Transfers to Stage 2 - - -   -
Transfers to Stage 3 -   -   -   -   
Loan Written off
- - - -
At 31 December 2022 17,259 69,726 113,840 200,825
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021          27,112              20,211              181,247            228,570
New assets originated or purchased            1,454 - - 1,454
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)        (13,429)              25,991              (28,964)            (16,402)
Impact on Expected Credit loss - - - -
Transfers to Stage 1 -   -   -   -   
Transfers to Stage 2 -   -   -   -   
Transfers to Stage 3 -   -   -   -   
Loan Written off -   -   (7,791) (7,791)
At 31 December 2021
15,137 46,202 144,492 205,8312022 Annual Report & Financial Statements8421.2.3   Retail loans
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk of Retail loans based on 
the Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of impairment allowances.
2022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 735,268 - - 735,268
Grade 4-5 - 8,439 - 8,439
Grade 6 - - 5,547 5,547
Grade 7 - - 744 744
Grade 8 - - 127,488 127,488
At 31 December 2022 735.268 8,439 133,779 877,486
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to Retail loan is, as follows:
2022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2022596,871               9,904         105,976       712,751
New assets originated or purchased 434,137 4,293                 -       438,430
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)(295,740)             (5,758) 27,802     (273,695)
Transfers to Stage 1 -   -   -   -   
Transfers to Stage 2 - -   -   -   
Transfers to Stage 3 - -   - -   
Amount written off
0 0 0 0
At 31 December 2022 735,268 8,439 133,779 877,486
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021480,838 12,193 79,408 572,438
New assets originated or purchased 345,934 7222.80923 - 353,157
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)      (229,901) (9,512) 26,569 (212,844)
Transfers to Stage 1 0 0 0 -
Transfers to Stage 2 0 0 0 -
Transfers to Stage 3 0 0 0 -
Amount written off
0 0 - -
At 31 December 2021 596,871 9,904 105,976 712,751
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to Retail loan is, as follows:
2022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 20221,170 77 105,837 107,084
New assets originated or purchased 1,447 -   -   1,447
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)(2,173) (57) 25,095 22,865
Impact on Expected Credit loss
-   -   -   085         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements85Transfers to Stage 1 -   -   -   0
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - 0
Transfers to Stage 3 - -   - 0
Loan Written off - - - 0 
At 31 December 2022 444 20 130,932 131,397
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2021           2,555 322  79,447             82,323
New assets originated or purchased 713 -   -   713
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)          (2,098)                 (244)               26,390 24,048
Re-measurement of loss allowance - - - -
Transfers to Stage 1 -   -   -   -   
Transfers to Stage 2 -   - -   -   
Transfers to Stage 3 -   -   -   -   
Loan Written off
- - - -
At 31 December 2021 1,170 77 105,837 107,084
22.    INVESTMENT (OTHER THAN SECURITIES): FAIR VALUE THROUGH OCI
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢ ’000
At 1 January                                                        99,926  91,892
Exchange difference                                        0 (6)
Fair value adjustments (note 38) 34,803 8,040
At 31 December 134,729 99,926
Investment (other than securities)
Institution Balance as at 2021 Fair value movement Market value
Ghana International Bank Limited 79,842             39,147 118,989
Agridev Real Estates Limited 19,210 (4,398)              14,812
Metro Mass Transportation Ltd - - -
Cocoa Processing Company 34 -   32 
Ghana Textile Manufacturing Company 544 -   544 
SDC Finance Limited 137 -   137 
Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial 
Telecommunication (SWIFT) 159 -                   213
Acitivity Venture Finance Company Limited - - -
Ayensu Starch Company - - -
TOTAL 99,926             34,803            134,729
Breach in investment holding limits
The Bank’s holdings in four (4) non-subsidiary institutions (in the table below) are in breach of section 73(3) which states 
that “Bank or Specialised Deposit-taking Institution shall not invest or hold investments in the share capital of a body corporate other than a subsidiary of the bank or specialized deposit-taking institution that represents more than five percent interest in the body corporate”.
The bank’s holding in Ghana International Bank Limited is also in breach of section 73(1) of the Banks and Specialised 
Deposit-taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act, 930), which state that “Bank or Specialised Deposit-taking Institution shall not invest or hold investments in the share capital of a body corporate other than a subsidiary of the bank or specialized deposit-taking institution if the amount of investment exceeds ten percent of the net own funds of the bank or specialized 
deposit-taking institution.”  2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements86Institution % Holding
Ghana International Bank Limited 9%
Agridev Real Estates Limited 10%
Metro Mass Transportation Ltd 16%
Activity Venture Finance Company 20%
23.   INVESTMENT IN ASSOCIATE COMPANIES
The Bank has one associate, Activity Venture Finance Company (AVF) that is immaterial to the Bank, which is 
equity accounted for.
Activity Venture Finance Co
The relationship with the Bank To help start-ups with high potential and risk
Principal place of business/country of incorporation Accra, Ghana
Ownership interest/voting rights 20%/20%
Fair value of ownership interest (if listed) N/A
The entity has been dormant for the past 72 months, the investment has been fully impaired.
24.   INCOME TAX
24.1   INCOME TAX EXPENSE RECOGNISED IN PROFIT OR LOSS
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Current year income tax - 20,059                58,562
Deferred tax                         (13,138)               (14,068)
6,922 44,494
24.2   CORPORATION TAX LIABILITY
Balance at 
1 JanuaryPayment 
during the 
yearCharge/credit 
for the yearPrior year 
adjustment Balance at 
31 December
Income tax GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 
2021 -
2022 26,663 (53,001) 20,059 - (6,279)
26,663 (53,001) 20,059 - (6,279)
National Stabilization Levy/Financial Recovery Levy8,610 (13,181) - (4,572)
Total tax 35,272 (66,183) 20,059 - (10,851)
24.3   EFFECTIVE TAX RECONCILIATION
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
(Loss)/Profit before tax (364,358)              126,097
Income tax using domestic tax rate (25%) (91,090)                31,524
Non-deductible expenses  127,066                33,298
Tax on exempt income (12,194)   (10,785)
Income subjected to tax at a different rate @20% (174) (278)
Allowable expenses (not through P&L) (6,757)                (7,711)
National fiscal stabilization levy /Financial sector recovery levy(5%)-                12,61087         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements87Deferred tax (17,267)                   (14,068)
(417)                44,590
Effective Income Tax Rate 0.1% 35.4%
*Non-deductible expenses includes fines and penalties disallowed for tax purpose
24.4   DEFERRED TAX ASSET
The following table shows deferred tax recorded in the statement of financial position
Deferred tax assetsAs at 1 
January 2022Income 
statementOCIAs at 31 
December 
2022
 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 
Property, plant and equipment (17,089) 905 (16,184)
Impairment allowance for loans and advances 92,353 5,258 - 97,611
Investment (other than securities) (19,452) (8,687) (28,139)
Revaluation Reserve - (21,718) (21,718)
Balance 31 December 55,812 6,162 -30,405 31,570
Deferred tax assets As at 1 
January 2021Income 
statementOCIAs at 31 
December 
2021
 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 
Property, equipment, and intangible assets (16,982) (107) (17,089)
Impairment allowance for loans and       
advances78,178 14,175 -  92,353
Investment (other than securities) (17,442) 0   -2,010 (19,452)
Balance 31 December 43,754 14,068 (2,010) 55,812
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Balance at 1 January 55,812 43,754
Charged to profit or loss 13,138 14,068
Charged to OCI (30,405) (2,010)
Balance 31 December 38,545 55,812
25.     INTANGIBLE ASSETS
2022 Software Work In-Progress Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost
At 1 January 2022 94,122 228   94,350
Acquisitions 1,584 485 2,069
Transfers from Plant, property and equipment - - -
Transfers from work in progress 327 (327) -
96,033 386 96,419
Amortisation
At 1 January 2022 66,317 -   66,317
Charge for the year 10,010 -   10,010
At 31 December 2022 76,327 -   76,327
Net Book ValueAt 31 December 2022
19,706 386 20,0922022 Annual Report & Financial Statements882021 Software Work In-Progress Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost
At 1 January 2021 90,549 - 90,549
Acquisitions 2 2,762 2,764
Transfer from plant, property and equipment - 1,036 1,036
Transfers from work in progress 3,570 (3,570) -
94,121 228 94,349
Accumulated amortization
At 1 January 2021 52,848 - 52,848
Charge for the year 13,469 - 13,469
At 31 December 2021 66,317 - 66,317
Net Book Value
At 31 December 2021 27,804 228 28,032
Work-in-progress
• Work-in-progress at the end of the year.GHS 386 (2021: nil)  
• No impairment losses on intangible assets were recognized during the year (2021: Nil)
• There were no capitalized borrowing costs related to intangible assets during the year (2021: Nil)
• There were no restrictions on title and intangible assets pledged as security for liabilities during the year 
(2021: Nil)
26.   OTHER ASSETS
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Advance payment                                 421 65
Pre payments                             14,322                           12,472
Sundry receivables                             15,318                           14,320
L e a s e  d e p o s i t s  f r o m  A g r i d e v                                                                                                                                   28,754                           20,138
Stationery Stock                              2,827 -
Others                                                                                                                                           2,276 5,260
Total 63,918 52,254
Current 42,848 39,577
Non-current 21,070 12,677
Total 63,918 52,254
*Sundry receivables are carried at amortised cost, expected credit loss for these instruments were assessed to be insignificant.**Others represent reimbursable from money transfer counterparties and stationery stock.
27.   PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
2022Land & 
BuildingComputersFurniture & 
EquipmentMotor   
Vehicles Capital 
W I P Leasehold 
ImprovementTotal
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost/Valuation 
At 1 January 2022 93,554            35,752           28,962 12,475  19,281        34,633 224,657 
Additions 41             2,436             2,242 80  26,360 45 31,204 
Disposal -   (184) - -         -                 -   (184)
Reversal -                    -                    -   - (6)             (74) (68)
Transfers from WIP 46             4,764 376                -     (7,085)          2,127 22889         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements89Transfers to 
Intangible-                    -                    -   -  (228)                -   (228)  
Revaluation 86,871                  -                   -                   -                   -                   -  86,871 
At 31 December 2022180,512 42,768 31,580 12,555 38,334 36,731 342,480
Accumulated Depreciation
At 1 January 2022 29,150            26,559           19,142 8,038         -          28,034 110,922
Charge for the year 4,784             3,481             3,230 1,484         -            2,430 15,410 
Disposal -   (184) - -         -                 -   (184)
Write Offs
0                  -                    -                  -           -                 -                  -   
At 31 December 
202233,934 29,856 22,372 9,522         -   30,464 126,148
Net Book Value
At 31 December 
2022146,578 12,912 9,208 3,033  38,334 6,267 216,332
2021Land & 
BuildingComputersFurniture & 
EquipmentMotor   
Vehicles Capital 
W I P Leasehold 
ImprovementTotal
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost/Valuation 
At 1 January 2021 93,399 33,570 23,759 7,811 5,771.492 30,969.013 195,279
Additions 14 1,729 5,900 - 25,047 126 32,815
Disposal -   (1,423) (907)   -         -                 -   (2,375)
Reversal -                    -                    -    (45)  (26) - (26)
Transfers from WIP 141             1,876 210                -   (7,085) 3,538 -
Transfers to 
Intangible-                    -                    -   4,709 (1,036)               -   (1,036)
At 31 December 202193,554 35,752 28,962 12,475 19,281 34,633 224,657
Accumulated Depreciation
At 1 January 2021 24,593            25,422 17,108 6,671         -   25,685 99,479 
Charge for the year 4,557             2,559 2,936 1,412         -   2,349 
13,813  
Disposal -   (1,422) (903) (45)         -                 -   (2,369)
Write Offs 0                  -                    -                  -           -                 -                  -   
At 31 December 
202129,150 26,559 19,141 8,038         -   28,034 110,922
Net Book Value
At 31 December 
202164,404 9,193 9,820 4,437 19,281 6,599 113,735
Cost component of revalued property
If the land and buildings were stated on a historical cost basis, the amounts would have been as follows:
               2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost 106,650 13,052
Accumulated depreciation (38,612) (4,267)
68,038 8,785
Disposal ScheduleCost and Accumulated depreciationThe cost and accumulated depreciation of assets disposed is made up of cost of disposals and write-offs and 
their corresponding accumulated depreciation.2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements902022 Computers Furniture & Equipment Motor & Vehicle Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost 184 - - 184
Accumulated depreciation (184) - - (184)
Net book value 0 - - 0
Proceeds         19,200 - - 19,200
Gain/(Loss) on disposal 19,200 0 0 19,200
2021 Computers Furniture & Equipment Motor & Vehicle Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost 1,423                      907                 45           2,375
Accumulated depreciation (1,422)                   (903)                     (45) (2,369)
Net book value 1 5 0 6
Proceeds 0 260 10 270
Profit/Loss on disposal -1 255 10 264
None of the property,plant and equipment of the Bank had been pledged as security for liabilities and there were 
no restrictions on the title of any of the Bank’s property and equipment at the reporting date and at the end of the previous year. Capital commitments not provided for in the financial statements as at 31 December 2022 was nil. (2021: Nil).
28.       RIGHT OF USE ASSETS
The Bank leases land and buildings. Information about leases for which the Company is a lessee is presented below.
2022 Rental space Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost/Valuation 
At 1 January 2022 (Transfer from prepayment) 261,970 261,970
Additions                          7,186 7,186
Effect of modification (13,863) (13,863)
At 31 December 2022 255,293 255,293
Depreciation
At 1 January 2022 111,415 111,415
Charge for the year 32,955 32,955
At 31 December 2022 144,370 144,370
Net Book Value
At 31 December 2022                                110,923 110,923
2021 Rental space Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost/Valuation 
At 1 January 2021 (Transfer from prepayment) 255,276 255,276
Additions 6,694 6,694
Termination of lease             -            -
At 31 December 2021 261,970 261,970
DepreciationAt 1 January 2020 71,751 71,751
Charge for the year 39,664 39,664
At 31 December 2020 111,415 111,41591         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements91Net Book Value
At 31 December 2021                                150,555 150,555
29.   CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’ 000
Cash 295,328 188,902
Bank Balance 1,588,204 723,884
14-Day/91-Day Treasury Bill 100,000 198,891
Cash and cash equivalent in statement of cash flows 1,983,532 1,111,677
Included in the cash and cash equivalent is an amount of GH¢ 100,000 (2021: 198,891) which has been 
disclosed as part of Investments Securities in Note 20.
Included in the bank balances above is a mandatory reserve deposits of GH¢703,782 (2021: GH¢394,197) with 
Bank of Ghana representing 12% the Bank’s total deposits.
30.   BORROWED FUNDS
               2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Government of Ghana 68,556 65,324
Central Bank of Ghana 51,979 19,311
Other Financial Institutions 274,692 38,181
AFD/Rubber Phase IV and V 193,211 171,742
Total 588,438 294,559
2022Government 
of GhanaCentral 
BankFinancial 
InstitutionsAFD/Rubber 
Phase IV&VTotal
Balance as at 1 January 2022 65,324 19,311 38,181 171,742 294,559
Additions 2,571 36,362 12,581,959 106,459 12,727,351
Interest 2,208 1,976 6,519 464 11,167
Payment (1,547) (5,670) (12,351,968) (85,454) (12,444,639)
Balance as at 31 December 2022 68,556 51,979 274,692 193,211 588,438
2021Government of 
GhanaCentral 
BankFinancial 
InstitutionsAFD/Rubber 
Phase IV&VTotal
Balance as at 1 January 2021 65,440 11,988 46,673         189,072 313,173
Additions 908 6,333 606,004            5,519 618,764
Interest 1,965 990 799                 59 3,813
Payment (2,989) - (615,295) (22,907) (641,191)
Balance as at 31 December 2021 65,324 19,311 38,181 171,742 294,559
30.a.   Government of Ghana  
This consists of multiple facilities granted to the Bank to finance food crops, non-traditional exports, agro industry as well as institutional support. Interest rates range from 1.8% - 5% with maturities ranging from 2018 to 2051. The disclosure is based on the specific project the loan was meant for .
Details of these borrowings are shown below: 
Government of Ghana 2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
ADF Projects                  50,404              46,510
EDAIF                   2,835                3,600
AFD/MOFA                  14,987              14,246
AfDB/KP.IRR. Projects 992                  9682022 Annual Report & Financial Statements92AFD/MOFA COCONUT DEV’T (662) -
Total 68,556 65,324
30.b     Central Bank
These borrowings are for on-lending purposes. Interest rate ranges from 3% to 20% and maturity is usually long 
term.
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
IFAD SCIMP            1,958                   1,839
IDA/BADEA            1,890                   1,807
SMALL SCALE IRR.DEV PROJECTS 676 664
CFD Loan to GREL 381 373 
IFAD/MEST Rural Ent. 534 534 
IFAD /UWADEP 652 602 
ADB/BADEA/BOVID 10,493                   7,134
OVCF 196                   6,357
FARM DIRECT         34,504 -
AFD/MOFA COCONUT DEV’T               695 -
TOTALS 51,979 19,310 
30.c     Financial institutions
These borrowings are for liquidity management purposes. Interest rate ranges from 15% to 30% and maturity is usually within one year.
Details of the borrowings from financial institutions are shown below:
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
EXIMBANK                        -                20,980 
GHANA ARM FORCES                  92,273                     -   
SUNU ASSURANCE                   1,452                     -   
GIFEC                  10,329                     -   
GHIB                  56,599              17,201 
OMNIBSIC                   9,146 -
UBA                  87,469 -
ABG                  17,152 -
OTHERS                      273 -
Total 274,692 38,181
30.d        Others
AFD - The general purpose of the credit facility is to finance long term loans dedicated to the Rubber Out 
grower Plantation Programme (ROPP).  Average Interest is at a rate of 2.07% maturing in 2027. 
Details of other borrowings are shown below:
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
AFD/Rubber Phase IV 193,211 171,74293         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements9331.   DEPOSITS FROM CUSTOMERS
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Savings Deposits 919,695              751,256
Demand and Call Deposits 4,416,691          3,537,070
Fixed/Time Deposits 528,465 638,890
Total 5,864,851 4,927,216
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Customer deposits
Maturity analysis of customer depositsFrom Government and Parastatals:Payable within 90 days 460,959 535,098
Payable after 90 days and within one year                                          
328,706 258,944
789,665 794,042
From Private Sector and individuals:Payable within 90 days 2,890,682 2,386,409
Payable after 90 days and within one-year
2,184,504 1,746,765
5,075,186 4,133,174
Total 5,864,851 4,927,216
    Twenty largest depositors to total deposit ratio is 19.47% (2021: 23.52%)
32.   OTHER LIABILITIES
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Expected Credit losses on contingent liabilities 7,860 1,728
Managed funds 3,298 9,846
Payables * 91,130 52,697
Provident fund 4,296 3,126
Statutory Deductions 2,639 1,694
Visa and Point of sales settlement 14,798 8,460
Accruals ** 25,086 15,062
Staff long service awards (i) 2,507 3,383
Total 151,614 95,996
Current 36,728 21,100
Non-current 114,886 74,896
Total 151,614 95,996
Payables* consist of Payment orders and unclaimed credit items.
Accruals** comprise unpaid maintenance and utility expenses
i.       Movement in the liability for staff long service awards
The Bank has a long service award for its employees.  These are long service awards which accrue to employees based on graduated periods of uninterrupted service.  These awards accrue over the service life of employees. Employees leaving the service of the Bank after 5 years through retirement (both voluntary and compulsory) or resignation become eligible for these awards based on their current entitlement at the time of retirement or resignation based on their length of service. The bank has no further obligations once the staff leaves employment
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Liability for staff awards at 1 January 3,383 2,0132022 Annual Report & Financial Statements94Benefits paid by the plan (124) (113)
Past service cost (774) 1,320
Expenses recognised in profit or loss 22 164
Liability for staff awards at 31 December 2,507 3,383
2022 2021
Expenses recognised in profit and loss GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Current Service Cost                                                              643                  383
Interest Cost                                                      (621) (219)
                                                                                     22 164
Actuarial assumptions
The following are the principal assumptions at the reporting date.
Discount rate 21.01% 19.1%
General inflation rate 9.28% 10.4%
Assumptions regarding future mortality rates are based on published statistics and mortality tables. 
33.   LEASE LIABILITY   
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
As at 1 January 162,820              181,824
Additions                      2,280.40                 1,498
Modifications                       (36,163) -
Accretion of interest 7,211                 7,724
Exchange difference 56,885                 5,907 
Payments                              (43,406) (34,133)
As at 31 December 149,627 162,820
The Bank’s total cash outflows with regard to leases liabilities is GH¢43,406 (2021: GH¢34,660). 
Future minimum lease payments under non–cancellable operating leases as at 31 December were as follows :
Maturity analysis of lease liability 2022 2021
GHS’000 GHS’000
Within one year 29,690 33,984
After one year but not more than five years 115,183 144,648
More than five years 4,754 0
Total 149,627 178,632
34.   STATED CAPITAL
Reconciliation
2022 2021
No. of Shares Proceeds No. of Shares Proceeds
Authorized:  GH¢’000  GH¢’000 
Balance as at 1 January     346,952,253 698,700 346,952,253 698,700 
Issued Shares - - - -
Balance as at 31 December 346,952,253 698,700 346,952,253 698,700 
35.       ACCUMULATED LOSSES
2022 2021
GH¢’000  GH¢’000 
At 1 January                             (236,645)                 (252,236)95         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements95Transfer to credit risk reserve (67,054)                    (25,210)
Transfer to statutory reserve                                          (0)                    (40,801)
Profit for the year (371,280)                     81,602
Total (674,978) (236,645)
36.       REVALUATION RESREVE
This reserve comprises the cumulative net change in the fair value of property and equipment. 
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
At 1 January 57,531 57,531
Additions 86,871 0
Deferred tax (21,718) 0
At 31 December 122,684 57,531
37.       STATUTORY RESERVE
Statutory reserve represents cumulative amounts set aside from annual profits after tax required under section 
34(i) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit–Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).  The proportion of net profits transferred to reserves ranges from 12.5% to 50% of net profit after tax, depending on the relationship that the balance on statutory reserves bears to paid up capital. 
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
At 1 January 182,015 141,214
Transfer from Retained earnings 0 40,801
At 31 December 182,015 182,015
38.       CREDIT RISK RESERVE
The credit risk reserve is a non-distributable reserve required by Bank of Ghana to account for difference between impairment loss on financial assets as per IFRS and the specific and the general impairment loss on loans and advances and contingent liabilities per the Central Bank’ s prudential guidelines.2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements962022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
At 1 January 178,298 153,088
Transfer (to)/from Retained earnings 67,054 25,210
At 31 December 245,352 178,298
Reconciliation between Bank of Ghana impairment allowance and IFRS impairment
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Bank of Ghana impairment allowance for loans and advances                               757,359 641,374
IFRS Impairment for loans and advances at 31 December                                   (512,007) (463,075)
Credit risk reserve at 31 December 245,352 178,298
39.          FAIR VALUE THROUGH OCI
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
At 1 January 58,356 52,326
Fair value adjustment, net of tax (Note 38ii) 26,062 6,030
At 31 December 84,417 58,356
ii. The Fair Value Reserves includes the cumulative change in the fair value of equity investments until the 
investment is derecognized or impaired. Fair value through other comprehensive income net of tax is made up of:
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Investment (other than securities)                  34,749 8,040
D e f e r r e d  Ta x                                                                                                                               (8,687) (2,010)
Total 26,062 6,030
40.         CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS INCLUDING OFF BALANCE SHEET ITEMS
In common with other banks, the Bank conducts business involving acceptances, guarantees, performances and indemnities.  The majority of these facilities are offset by corresponding obligations of third parties. The Bank also holds certain securities in its own name on behalf of customers.  The values of these securities are not recognized in the statement of financial position.
Letters of credit commit the Bank to make payments to third parties, on production of documents, which are 
subsequently reimbursed by customers.
Guarantees are generally written by a bank to support performance by a customer to third parties. The Bank will 
only be required to meet these obligations in the event of customer ’s default.
Contingencies and commitments in the financial statements as at 31 December 2022 in respect of the above amounted to GH¢ 462,748 (2021: GH¢174,527), as detailed below:
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’00
Guarantees and Indemnities 49,851 33,702
Undrawn Overdraft 134,768 33,545
Letters of Credit 278,130 107,279
Total 462,748 174,527
40.1     CREDIT RISK QUALITY OF LETTER OF CREDIT, COMMITMENTS AND GUARANTEES
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk of credit, commitments and guarantees based on the Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of impairment allowances.97         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements972022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 278,130 - - 278,130
Grade 4-5 49,851 - - 49,851
Grade 6 134,768 - - 134,768
Grade 7 - - - 0
Grade 8 - - - 0
At 31 December 2022 462,748 0 0 462,748
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 107,279 - - 107,279
Grade 4-5 33,702 - - 33,702
Grade 6 - - - 0
Grade 7 - - - 0
Grade 8 - - - 0
At 31 December 2021 140,982 0 0 140,982
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to credit, commitments and guarantees is as 
follows:
2022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2022140,982 - - 140,982
New assets originated or purchased- - - -   
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)321,766 - - 321,766
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - 0
At 31 December 2022
462,748 0 0 462,748
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3   Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at1 January 2021298,111 - - 298,111
New assets originated or purchased - - - 0
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)(157,129) - - (157,129)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - 0
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - 0
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - 0
At 31 December 2021
140,982 0 0 140,982
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to credit, commitments and guarantees is  as follows:
2022 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3   Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 20221,728 - - 1,728
New assets originated or purchased 0 - - 02022 Annual Report & Financial Statements98Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)6,132 - - 6,132
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - 0
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - 0
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - 0
At 31 December 2022 7,860 0 0 7,860
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3   Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 202124,811 - - 24,811
New assets originated or purchased - - - -
Assets derecognised or repaid (excluding write offs)(23,083) - - (23,083)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2021
1,728 - - 1,728
40.3.    CONTINGENT LIABILITY (GHS 000)
Pending Legal ClaimsAt the year-end there were 13 (2021: 14) legal cases pending against the Bank. Should judgment go in favour of the plaintiffs, likely claims against the Bank have been estimated at GH¢ 3,122 (2021: GH¢ 3,821). A provision of GH¢3,122 is held in the books
40.3     CONTINGENT ASSET
At the reporting date, there were no contingent asset (2021: Nil)
41.       RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Parties are considered to be related if one party has the ability to control the other party or exercise significant influence over the other party in making financial or operating decisions, or one other party controls both. Shareholders of the entity are as follows:
Shareholders
Name of shareholder No. of shares in thousand Percentage holding (%)
Financial Investment Trust        222,218 64.05%
Government of Ghana                                                                               74,579 21.50%
Ghana Amalgamated Trust PLC 39,077 11.26%
Others                                                                                                                      11,078 3.19%
Total 346,952 100.00%
At 31 December 2021 the following amounts related to transactions with the Government of Ghana
                                                                                                                           2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Government Securities 1,316,584 2,400,655
Loans and Advances 891,141 59,727
Borrowings 68,556 65,440
Others         11,395 30,973
Associated Company
The Bank provides general banking services to its associated company.  These transactions are conducted on similar terms to third-party transactions. There were no transactions with associated company during the period under consideration.
Details of investments in associated company are provided in Note 23.99         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements99Transactions with executive directors and key management personnel
Key management personnel are defined as those persons having authority and responsibility for planning, directing and controlling the activities of the Bank (directly or indirectly) and comprise the Directors and Senior Management of the Bank.
The Bank has advanced loans to some past directors as well as key management staff. No provisions have 
been made in respect of loans to the Executive Director or other members of key management personnel (or any connected person). 
Remuneration of Executive Directors and other key management personnel
The remuneration of executive directors and other key management personnel during the year were as follows:
Short term employee benefits 2022 2021
GH¢’000  GH¢’000
Salaries and other short-term benefits 22,296 16,681
Social security contributions 2,238 1,145
Total 24,534 17,826
Remuneration of executive directors during the year amounted to GH¢ 2,003 (2021 GH¢1,447). 
Details of transactions and balances between the Bank and Executive Directors and other key management 
personnel are as follows:
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Loans
Loans outstanding at 31 December 3,100 2,363
Interest income 145 124
Interest rates charged on loans to staff are below market rates.  These loans are secured over the assets 
financed of the respective borrowers.  These loans are fair valued at the year end. There were no loans to the Executive Director in the current year.
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Deposits 18,266 11,149
Key Management’s shareholding
  No. of shares % Holding
Key management 20,127 0.006
Transactions with companies in which a Director or other members of key management personnel is 
related 
The executive director is a non-executive board member of Ghana International Bank Plc (GIB).Details of 
transactions and balances between the Bank and GIB are as follows:
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Borrowings 56,599 17,201
Bank balance 31,342 14,705
Transactions with non- executive directors
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Directors’ remuneration
Fees and allowances for services as directors 1,722 1,740
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Deposits 18,266 11,1492022 Annual Report & Financial Statements100Directors’ Shareholding 
At 31 December 2021, the past directors named below held shares in the Bank. 
Directors No. of shares % Holding
Nana Soglo Alloh IV 54,800 0.00016
Daniel Asiedu 2,000 0.000006
Dr. Adu Anane Antwi 800 -
Total 57,600 0.000166
42.       DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLAN
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Pension scheme, the National Social Security Fund 17,204 14,225
Provident Fund 9,975 8,238
Total 27,179 22,463
43.       ASSETS PLEDGED AS SECURITY
At 31 December 2022 the value of government securities pledged as collateral was GH¢ 210,800(2021: 13,500)
44.        COLLATERAL ACCEPTED AS SECURITY FOR ASSETS
At 31 December 2022 the value of government securities accepted as collateral that the Bank is permitted to sell 
or re-pledge in the event of default was GH¢ 120,393 (2021: GH¢70,200).
These transactions are conducted under terms that are usual and customary to standard lending, and securities 
borrowings and lending activities.
45.       NATIONAL FISCAL STABILISATION LEVY AND FINANCIAL RECOVERY LEVY
The National Fiscal Stabilisation Levy Act 862 became effective from 12 July 2014.  Under the Act, a 5% levy will be charged on profit before tax and is payable quarterly. The Financial recovery levy became effective from January, 2021. Under the Act, a 5% levy will be charged on profit before tax and is payable quarterly
46.       REGULATORY DISCLOSURES
i.           Non–Performing Loans Ratio
Percentage of gross non-performing loans (“substandard to loss”) to total credit/advances portfolio (gross29.74% (202131.21%)
ii.          Capital Requirement Directive (CRD)
The Capital Requirement Directive at the end of December 31, 2022 was calculated at approximately 7.36% (2021: 14.49%), which is below the minimum required by the regulator of 10 %. Also, the banks unimpaired unimpaired capital of GH¢206m is below the minimum capital of GH¢400m.
To bring relief to the banking sector following the GDDEP, the Central Bank has given banks up to three years 
to restore any diminution in capital arising from the program. Consequently, the board will engage shareholders for additional injection of capital to restore capital to pre-GDDEP levels where necessary. It is important to note the bank will be able to fulfil its obligations to depositors during the next 12 months.
iii.          Liquid Ratio
Percentage of liquid assets to volatile liabilities: 86.11% (2021: 101.87%).
47.       SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
There were material significant events after the reporting date that require disclosure in and adjustment to the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2022. The Government concluded the Domestic Debt Exchange Program (DDEP) which was announced in November 2022 on 21st February 2023. The impact of the DDEP on the Financial Statements resulted in ECL of GHS 375million.101         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements10148        Adjustment for non-cash items
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Depreciation and amortization 58,382 66,946
Impairment charge on financial assets 27,164 41,781
Impairment on other assets 
( investment and receivables)375,147 -
(Gain)/loss on disposal of property and equipment (19) (264)   
Net interest income (422,317) (480,326)
Total 116,931 (371,864)
48.1    Changes in operating assets and liabilities
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Loans & advances (959,466) (420,232)
Other assets (11,657) 9,490
Deposits from customers 925,263 642,739
Restricted cash (13,471) 16,704
Other liabilities 49,485 29,943
Total (9,847) 278,645
49.    Default in statutory requirements and accompanying sanctions:
For the period under review, the bank did not record any statutory liquidity breaches and therefore did not incur any sanctions.
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
(i) Sanctions (GHS'000) - - 
(ii) Default in statutory liquidity - - 
 Other regulatory breaches (including onsite examination)
2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
(i) Sanctions (GHS'000) - 374
(ii)  Number of breaches - 12022 Annual Report & Financial Statements102Value Added Statement 2022 2021
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Interest earned and other operating income 1,128,932              885,429
Direct cost of services (675,414)             (412,736)
Value added by banking services 453,518              472,693
Non-banking income 6,745                12,412
Impairment (430,212)               (41,781)
Value Added 30,051              443,324
Distributed as follows:
To employees:Directors (without executives) (1,722)                (1,740)
Executive Directors 1,447                 1,447
Other employees (335,753)             (249,988)
(336,028)             (250,281)
To Government:Income tax (6,922)               (44,494)
To providers of capitalDividends to shareholders - - 
To expansion and growth:Depreciation (48,372)               (53,477)
Amortization (10,010)               (13,469)
(58,382)               (66,946)
(Loss)Profit for the period (371,280)                81,602APPENDIX I2The Peopleʼs Bank103         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements103Shareholders’ Information - Unaudited Number of Shareholders
The Bank had 446 ordinary shareholders at 31 December 2022 distributed as follows:
No. of No of % of shares
Category shareholders shares held
1-1,000 419 114,937 0.03
1,001-5,000 24 49,606 0.01
5,001-10,000 3 23,560 0.01
Above 10,000 13 346,764,150 99.95
Total 459 346,952,253 100.00
20 Largest Shareholders
Control rights: Each share is entitled to the same voting rights.
No. NAMENO. OF 
SHARES % 
1 FINANCIAL INVESTMENT TRUST 222,218,113 64.05
2 GOVERNMENT OF GHANA 74,579,327 21.50
3 GHANA AMALGAMATED TRUST PLC 39,076,924 11.26
4 ESOP 5,983,828 1.72
5 DOE, OSCAR YAO O. Y. D. 2,595,181 0.75
6 COFIE, MARK BLEWUNYO KODJO M. B. K. C. 2,100,629 0.61
7 NANA, SOGLO ALLOH IV 54,800 0.02
8  PARACELSUS PHARMACY & MARKETING  
CONSULTANCY LTD,  P. P. M. C. L.50,000 0.01
9 DOE, OSCAR YAO O. Y. D. 36,500 0.01
10 BONDZI-SIMPSON, LESLIE 26,600 0.01
11 MR, JOHN BEKUIN-WURAPA 20,000 0.01
12 GOGO, BENJAMIN AKUETE 12,000 0.00
13 LAING, ARCHIBALD FERGUSON 10,248 0.00
14ARMAH-MENSAH, EDWARD IAN NII AYITEY E. I. N. A. A.10,000 0.00
15 FIADJOE, ABLA GRACE A. G. F. 7,500 0.00
16 MARY EMMELINE SAAH,  M. E. S 6,060 0.00
17 MR, ISAIAH OFFEI-DARKO 5,000 0.00
18 DUAH, EUGENE KWAKU 4,500 0.00
19 ODAME, DESMOND YAW DYO 3,424 0.00
20 OFFEI-DARKO, ISAIAH 2,500 0.00
SUB TOTAL of TOP 20
346,803,134 99.96
Others 149,119 0.04
346,952,253 100.00APPENDIX II2The Peopleʼs Bank2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements104
105         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements105ABOUT US
AGRIBUSINESS  
• Sector Loans
• Working Capital Loans• Asset Finance • Trade Finance (Export & Import)• Group Loans • Lines of Credit • Managed Fund • Nucleus-Outgrower schemes • Guarantees • Institutionally Managed Farmers loans• Agric Value Chain Financing
CORPORATE & COMMERCIAL BANKING
• Foreign Currency Account• Schools and Colleges Account• Business Overdraft• Project Account• Guarantees• IPC Discounting Loans• Current and Call Accounts• Term Loans
LEASE & ASSET FINANCE
• Fleet Finance • Equipment Lease • Asset Re-Lease (Sale and Lease back) • Household Asset Finance • Private Equipment Finance • Agri-Lease • Gold Drive Plus
TRADE SERVICES
• Advance Payments• Import Letters of Credit• Import Bills for Collection• Export Letters of Credit
• Export Bills for Collection
ADB BANCASSURANCE • INSURANCE 
• Abusua Anidaso (Life and Funeral Policy)• ADB Motor Insurance
MONEY TRANSFER
• Western Union 
• MoneyGram • Ria Money • Unity Link • Transfast • Instant Money • Zeepay 
CONSUMER BANKING
• Current Account • Savings Deposit Account • Hybrid (Cedi) Current Account • Local Transfer Payment • Salary Account • Personal Loans • Personal Investment Plus (PIP)• Controller (CAGD) Loans• Pay Day Plus• Mmofra Account• Home-link Account • ADB Collabo/Collasave • Foreign Currency Account • Foreign Exchange Account• Adwadifo Anidaso
• Institutionally Managed Personal Loans (IMPL) 
TREASURY MANAGEMENT
• Fixed (Cedi) Deposit Account
• Fixed Deposit Foreign Currency (USD, GBP & EUR)• Primary Dealer in BOG/GOG Treasury Bill/Notes/Bonds• Foreign Currency Deposits• Cash Management• International Transfers using the SWIFT System• Foreign Exchange – Buying and Selling
• Custody Services
E-BUSINESS
• ADB Collections Solutions
• ADB Payments Solutions• ADB Internet Banking (QuicNet)• ADB Merchant Acquiring (POS & E-Commerce)• GhQR  • ADB USSD *767#• ADB Alert Services (Quic Alert)• ADB Visa Cards (Debit & Prepaid)• Ezwich• GH Link• ADB Mobile Banking Application• ADB Bill Payments (DSTV, GOtv, ECG & Passport)• ADB Online Payment Solutions
• ATM Services
PARASTATALS AND INSTITUTIONAL BANKING
• Government Institutions
• Ministries• Department• Agencies• Strategic Banking Partnership with Corporate Institutions• Revenue Collections• Investment Services
• Transactional Services
EXECUTIVE BANKINGOUR BANKING
SERVICES2The Peopleʼs Bank2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements106
107         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements107ACCRA WEST
DansomanAbeka LapazWeijaKaneshieBukomMadinaGulf HouseAchimotaKasoaWisconsin UniversityUniversity of Ghana, Legon
Telephone: 0202506203 ext 204/205 
030- 2506201, 2506202, 2506203
ACCRA EAST
Tema MainTema MeridianSpintexTeshieNunguaTema EastTema MankoadzeLabone JunctionOsuAdabrakaAccra NewtownNimaRing Road CentralMakolaADB HouseRidgeDiamond HouseTelephone: 030- 3216100, 3204305,3203371, 3206396, 0244477927
CENTRAL/WESTERN/ WESTERN NORTH 
Agona SwedruMankessimAssin FosuCape CoastUCCTakoradiTakoradi Market CircleAgona NkwantaGrel ApemanimSefwi WiawsoBonsu NkwantaEnchiSefwi EssamJuabosoTelephone: 03120 29068, 0246746962
BONO EAST / BONO / AHAFO ASHANTI
SunyaniTechimanBerekumDormaa AhenkroNkoranzaAtebubuKumasi AdumKumasi MarketNhyiaesoEjisuNew EdubiaseObuasiAsante BekwaiKenyasiGoasoKwapongPrempeh IITelephone: 032-204-5260
EASTERN / VOLTA / OTI
KoforiduaNkawkawSuhumKadeAsiakwaHoHohoeKpandoKpeveNkwantaDenuSogakopeJuapongKpassaTelephone: 036 - 2028250, 2028284, 2028289034 - 2022292, 2022739
UPPER EAST / UPPER WEST
NORTHERN / SAVANNAHNORTH EAST
BolgatangaBawkuNavrongoWalewaleWaTumuBoleTamale MainTamale AboaboKaladanYendiSaveluguBuipeTelephone: 037- 2022629, 2022938,2027339, 0243283898 
ABOUT US
AREA 
OFFICES2The Peopleʼs Bank2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements108
109         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements109Greater-Accra Region
ABEKA LAPAZ BRANCH
Off George Bush N1 Highway, 
Near the Abrantie SpotTel: 030-7010373GPS: GA-428-1771Email: customercare@agricbank.com
ACCRA NEW TOWN BRANCH
Newtown Circle Road, Malam Atta Market in the Old Oxford Cinema BuildingTel: 030-2220989 / 0302-2220986  GPS: GA-069-3525Email: customercare@agricbank.com
ACHIMOTA BRANCH
Near Neoplan  Assembly Plant on the Achimota  Nsawam roadTel: 030-2420038 / 030-2420036 030-7002070GPS: GE-373-1882Email: customercare@agricbank.com
ADB HOUSE BRANCH
Independence Avenue after Latter Days Saints Church  GPS: GA-030-6976Tel: 030-7001997Email: customercare@agricbank.com
DANSOMAN BRANCH
Near Dansoman Round-About, Off Dansoman High Street  GPS: GA-537-1721 Tel: 030-2312414 / 030-2311636Email: customercare@agricbank.com
GULF HOUSE BRANCH
Main Gulf House Building on the Tetteh Quarshie – Legon Road.Tel: 030 2506201 / 030 2506202030 2506203    GPS: GA-289-5092Email: customercare@agricbank.com
KANESHIE BRANCH
Near Kaneshie Market, Off the Winneba RoadTel: 050-1569003GPS: GA-263-8055Email: customercare@agricbank.comWEIJA BRANCH
Near SCC Junction beforethe new Shoprite on the Mallam- Kasoa RoadTel: 030-2853081 / 030-2853083GPS: GS-0166-0410Email: customercare@agricbank.com
LABONE JUNCTION BRANCH
Labone Junction Off the Ring Road East, Near Danquah CircleTel: 055 2818 953  GPS: GL-015-7692Email: customercare@agricbank.com
ADABRAKA BRANCH
Opposite Long View Pharmacy on the Kojo Thompson Road   GPS: GA-074-0708Tel: 030-2242417   Email: customercare@agricbank.com
MADINA BRANCH
Opposite Rawlings Park on the Barclays LaneTel: 030-2668265 / 030-2674308 / 030-2675596GPS: GM-016-4945Email: customercare@agricbank.com
NIMA BRANCH
Near Nima Market, St. Kizito Parish, Off Nima-Mamobi RoadTel: 0302-264 512 GPS: GA-025-4476Email: customercare@agricbank.com
NUNGUA BRANCH
Off Teshie – Nungua Road, In front of the Nungua marketTel: 030-2712660 / 0302-717078  GPS: GZ-023-2058Email: customercare@agricbank.com
OSU BRANCH
Near Papaye Restaurant on the Oxford Street.Tel: 030 2782386 / 030 2779696 030-2779695 GPS: GA-081-4642 Email: customercare@agricbank.comRIDGE BRANCH
AFC Building, Opposite National Theathre on the Liberia RoadTel: 0307001562 GPS: GA-107-2442Email: customercare@agricbank.com
RING ROAD CENTRAL 
BRANCH
On Ring Road, Next to Bust Stop 
Restaurant   GPS: GA-048-9626Tel: 030-2229110  / 030-2239409Email: bidun@agricbank.com
LEGON BRANCH
Credit Union Building, University of Ghana.Tel: 0208-957231/0554-356399GPS: GA-419-8111Email: customercare@agricbank.com
WISCONSIN UNIVERSITY 
BRANCH
Wisconsin University College
No: 0243453632GPS: GE-281-057Email: customercare@agricbank.com
MAKOLA
Opposite Rawlings Park on the Barclays Lanetel: 0302 2675596 / 0302 6682650302 674308GPS: GA-183-8740Email: customercare@agricbank.com
SPINTEX ROAD BRANCH
Opposite Ghana Commercial Bank on the Spintex Road.Tel: 030-2816212 / 0302816213GPS: GZ-367-7394Email: customercare@agricbank.com
TEMA EAST (ASHAIMAN)
Off Tema – Akosombo Road, Near the Ashaiman Timber marketTel: 050-1569002 / 030-3308011GPS: GB-011-7408Email: customercare@agricbank.comABOUT US
BRANCHES 
& AGENCIES2The Peopleʼs Bank2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements110
111         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements111TEMA MAIN BRANCH
At the fishing Harbour, Near Pioneer 
Foods, New Town   GPS: GT-062-1117Tel: 030-3203371 / 030-3206396Email: nmills@agricbank.com
TEMA-MANKOADZE AGENCY
Tema Community 1, near VIP StationTel: 030-3204756Email: customercare@agricbank.com
 
TEMA MERIDIAN BRANCH
Tema Community 3, Close to former Meridian HotelTel: 030-7010321GPS: GT – 020 -0866Email: abasit@agricbank.com
TESHIE BRANCH
St. Anne’s Parish premises, Teshie RoadTel: 0300-2712664 / 0302-712549   GPS: GZ-018-4537Email: customercare@agricbank.com
BUKOM ARENA  
SSNIT SPORTS EMPORIUMSSNIT Sports Emporium, BukomTelephone: 055 2569 489Email: customercare@agricbank.com
DIAMOND HOUSE BRANCH
Diamond Cement Group Building, Steel Works Rd, TemaTel: 055-9722793    GPS: GA-107-2442Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Ashanti Region
ASHANTI BEKWAI BRANCH
Near Bekwai Post Office & Police 
StationTel: 032-24203157 / 032-2420315032-242035 / 032-2420357   GPS: AB-0000-8169Email:customercare@agricbank.com
EJISU BRANCH
Amakom Street, Near City Style BuildingTel:032-2398705 / 032-2398704032-2033481 / 032-2049576GPS: AE-0000-1704Email:customercare@agricbank.com
ADUM BRANCH
Nyarko Kusi Amoa Street, Near Central PrisonsTel: 032-2031537 / 032-2039854032-221521Email:customercare@agricbank.com
KUMASI-CENTRAL MARKET
BRANCH
Kumasi Zongo, behind the 
Zongo Police Station      Tel: 032-2033481 / 032-2033461/032-2033455 / 032-2033914GPS: AK-038-8417Email:customercare@agricbank.com
PREMPEH II ST. BRANCH
Prempeh Street, Near Hotel De KingswayTel: 032-2045263 / 032-2045275032-2045276 / 032-2045277GPS: AK-018-6205Email:customnercare@agricbank.com
NEW EDUBIASE BRANCH
Near the MarketTel: 020-6857305 / 032-219 2202 033-2192226GPS: A3-0000-6939Email:customercare@agricbank.com
OBUASI BRANCH
Obuasi Main Road, Opposite Metro Mass StationTel: 032-2440701 / 032-2540700GPS: AO-028-4692
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
NHYIAESO BRANCH
Kumasi Main Road, Nhyieso 
Roundabout, Nyarko Plaza 1Tel: 032-2190006  / 0322190008GPS: AK-237-5343Email: cgaamson@agricbank.com
Bono East Region
NKORANZA  BRANCH
Opposite the main market and 
adjacent to the VRA Office, Off the VRA Road.Tel: 035 -2092074 / 035 -2097313GPS: BO-0000-5543Email:customercare@agricbank.com
ATEBUBU BRANCH
10 metres from the main Lorry station, On the Atebubu-Ejura RoadTel: 032-2099568GPS: BA-00005-3243Email:customercare@agricbank.comTECHIMAN BRANCH
Off the Techiman - Tamale Road, Near the Tamale StationTel: 035- 2522304 / 035- 2091080 / 035 -2091686 GPS: BT-0013-8877Email:customercare@agricbank.com
Ahafo Region
KENYASI BRANCH
On the Kenyasi Road, Opposite the 
Kenyasi No.1 Police Station.Tel: 035-2094858 / 035-2197828035-2084594  GPS: BQ-0022-8978Email:customercare@agricbank.com
GOASO BRANCH
On Goaso Road, 100 metres away from the lorry stationand adjacent to Glory Oil Filling Station.  GPS: BU-0003-1974Tel: 035-2094370
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
KWAPONG BRANCH
Kwapong Main Road, 
Adjacent PBC OfficeTel: 032 -2034795  GPS: BV-0660-8420Email:customercare@agricbank.com
Bono Region
SUNYANI BRANCH
Sunyani-Berekum Road, Near 
Sunyani Post Office and Opposite Telecom.Tel: 0352025631 / 0352023107 / 0352027075GPS: BS-0006-3520Email: customercare@agricbank.com
BEREKUM BRANCH
Near the Berekum Training College and next to the Berekum Library.Tel: 035-2222104 / 035-2222153 035-2222507GPS: BB-0022-8879Email: customercare@agricbank.com
DORMAA AHENKRO BRANCH
Near the Traffic light on the Dormaa main roadTel: 035-2322251 / 035 -2322037035 -2322165GPS: BD-0002-2056Email: customercare@agricbank.com2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements112
113         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements113Central Region
AGONA SWEDRU BRANCH
Opposite Calvary Crusaders Church, 
Off Swedru StreetTel: 033-2093517/ 033-2192883GPS: CO-0000-9131Email: customercare@agricbank.com
ASSIN FOSU BRANCH
Opposite the Foso Lorry station Opposite the Foso Lorry station on the main Cape Coast-Kumasi RoadTel: 033-2140548 / 033-2192203 / 033-2192200GPS: CR-0008-8501Email: customercare@agricbank.com
CAPE COAST MAIN BRANCH
Chapel Square opposite John Wesley Methodist ChurchTel: 031-7010094  GPS: CC-008-3558Email: customercare@agricbank.com
KASOA BRANCH
Off the Bodweasi Road, Near Nsaniya Secondary SchoolTel: 055-2560717  GPS: CX-013-6878Email: customercare@agricbank.com
MANKESSIM BRANCH
At Abochie area on the Ajumako roadTel: 034-020 93017 / 034-209 3015GPS: CM-0412-5849Email: customercare@agricbank.com
UCC BRANCH
Near Casely – Hayford Hall, UCC Campus GPS CC-007-3155Tel: 033-2131989   GPS: CC-143-7930Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Eastern Region
ASIAKWA BRANCH
Off the Kyebi – Bunso Road, 
Adjacent the Asiakwa Police Station. EE 1314-8594Tel: 0302-962 144 / 0302-962 145GPS: EE-1314-8792Email: customercare@agricbank.com
KADE BRANCH
Off Okumaning Road, Adjacent GCB. P.O.Box KD 31, Kade. GPS: EK 0005-0093Tel: 0302 963 285 / 0302 963 286Email: customercare@agricbank.comKOFORIDUA BRANCH
Opposite B. Foster Bakery, Off B Foster Road. GPS EN 0100-632Tel: 034-2022739 / 034-2022235/ 034-2021048  GPS: EN-010-0736Email: customercare@agricbank.com
NKAWKAW BRANCH
Off Nkawkaw-Kumasi Road ,Near Ghana Commercial Bank and Behind Total Filling Station.  GPS: EJ-0000-5072 Tel: 020-4345378 / 034-3122041 034-3122068, 034-3122028, 034-3122457
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
SUHUM BRANCH
Off Suhum-Koforidua Road, Near 
Fanteakwa Rural Bank or Near the Police station. GPS: ES-0000-8212Tel: 034-7070198 / 034-2522373034-2522374Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Northern Region  
     
SAVELUGU BRANCH
5 minutes drive from Airport junction on the Salvelugu/Walewale road Or closer to Savelugu Hospital Tel: 037-2095822 / 037209822 / 037209820  GPS: NU-0020-3873Email: customercare@agricbank.com
TAMALE-ABOABO BRANCH
Near Aboabo Market, Off Tamale – Aboabo Road. GPS: NT-0005-7016Tel: 037-2026242 / 037-2023700Email: customercare@agricbank.com
TAMALE-MAIN BRANCH
Bolga Road Near Ghana Commercial BankTel: 037-2022629 / 037-2022938GPS: NT-0003-5994Email: customercare@agricbank.com
YENDI BRANCH
Left from SSNIT on Gushegu Road directly opposite Alhaji Baba mosqueTel: 020-4345425 / 426 / 037-7010033 
GPS: NY-0029-2275
TAMALE KALADAN 
Off the Tamale – Kaladan Road
Tel: 037-2022061 / 037-2022014GPS: NT-0020-7358Email: customercare@agricbank.comNorth East Region
  WALEWALE BRANCH
5 minutes walk from the main lorry 
station on the main high street of Tamale/Bolga road. Tel: 055-2559468  GPS: ND-00001-4206Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Savannah Region  
BOLE BRANCH
Wa Road, Near the SSNIT Office 
GPS: NB-00013-0010Tel: 0372-292172 Email: customercare@agricbank.com
BUIPE BRANCH
In front of Islamic Primary School, Off Kintampo – Tamale Road. GPS: N3-00007-1641Tel: 0302-962-150 / 0372-092 171
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Upper East Region
BAWKU BRANCH
Near Bawku Post Office, 
Off Bawku Main Road Tel: 020-4581275 / 050-4851100GPS: UA-0083-5128Email: customercare@agricbank.com
NAVRONGO BRANCH
On the main commercial street on the UDS road share boundaries with Bencyn Pharmacy GPS: UK-0007-8361 Tel: 038-2122200 / 038-2122 204Email: customercare@agricbank.com
BOLGATANGA BRANCH
Opposite Jubilee Park. GPS: UE-0002-8510Tel: 038-2022321 / 038-2022439 / 038-202178
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Upper West Region
WA BRANCH
Near SSNIT Office, Off WA main road
Tel: 039-2022095 / 039-2022090 / 039-2022342GPS: XW-0006-6353Email: customercare@agricbank.com
TUMU BRANCH
On Wa Main RoadTel: 038-2092312GPS: XS-00003-9114Email: customercare@agricbank.com2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements114
115         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements115Volta Region
DENU BRANCH
Near E.P. Church, Off the 
Denu - Adafianu RoadTel: 036-0530313 / 036-2530613 / 036-2531210GPS: VZ-0039-5125 Email: customercare@agricbank.com
HO BRANCH
In the old Bank for Housing and Construction (BHC) premises at Toviedzi. Next door to Ghana 
Commercial Bank
Opposite the Municipal Police Station  GPS: VH-0002-9235Tel: 036-2028250 / 036-2028284 / 036-2028289Email: customercare@agricbank.com
HOHOE BRANCH
Close to the Bank of Ghana and VODAFON office    GPS: VC-0000-0409Tel: 036-2722027 / 036-2722008Email: customercare@agricbank.com
JUAPONG BRANCH
Located on the Volta star textile Limited (Juapong textiles) roadTel: 034-2094299 / 034-2094376  GPS: VT-4198-6051Email: customercare@agricbank.com
KPANDO BRANCH
Near Weto Rural Bank, Opposite Kpando Ghana Commercial Bank Near Weto Rural Bank, Opposite Kpando Ghana Commercial Bank  GPS: VP-0006-3528 Tel: 036-2350939 / 036-2350942036-2350941 / 0362350940Email: customercare@agricbank.com
KPEVE BRANCH
Near Kpeve Market, Off the Hohoe RoadGPS: VE-0007-9139Email: customercare@agricbank.comSOGAKOPE BRANCH
Near Volta View Hotel/Directly opposite the main bus station, Off Tema - Aflao Road Tel: 030-2955386/396 / 020-820 5488   GPS: VU-000-0755Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Oti Region
KPASSA  BRANCH
Kpassa Township, 
close to the MarketTelephone: 055 9747890GPS: VO-0000-8483Email: customercare@agricbank.com
NKWANTA BRANCH
Approximately hundred meters off the main road (i.e. the Eastern Corridor).  
Tel: 054-4338198 / 054-4338199  GPS: VO-00000-8683
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Western North Region
ENCHI BRANCH
Adjacent Electricity 
Company of Ghana. Tel: 031-2622124  GPS: WA-00003-0414Email: customercare@agricbank.com
SEFWI ESSAM BRANCH
Near Essam Lorry StationTel; 055 2673 058 Email: customercare@agricbank.com
BONSU NKWANTA BRANCH
Near Bonsu Nkwanta Market. Tel: 032-2190715  GPS: WQ-3173-8051Email: customercare@agricbank.com
JUABOSO AGENCY
Juaboso, close to the market close to Fire Service  Telephone: 055 2569 492GPS: WQ-0000-4041Email: customercare@agricbank.comSEFWI WIAWSO BRANCH
Opposite Sefwi Wiawso Police Station at the end of the Municipal Assembly Road. Tel: 031-209 2093/0322-296 339GPS: WG-0000-2686Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Western Region
AGONA NKWANTA BRANCH
off Agona Nkwanta -Takoradi Road, 
Opposite Champion Filling Station or Police Station. Tel: 033-2093517 / 033-292883  GPS: WH-0002-9770Email: customercare@agicbank.com
TAKORADI BRANCH
Harbor Road, Next to GCB Bank. GPS: WS-406-2512 Tel: 031-2023511/ 031-2029060/68/49 Email: customercare@agricbank.com
TAKORADI MARKET CIRCLE 
BRANCH
Locate us on the Collins Street 
Ameen Sungari Building beside Grovy SpotGPS: AM 29 Collins Street WS-245-7732 Call 059 3845 659 • 059 3845 673
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
GREL APEMENIM BRANCH
Near rubber factory, GREL Office
Tei: 030-3962913  GPS: WH-0254-8493Email: customercare@agricbank.com2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements116
117         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements117I/We__________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________of________________________________________________________________being member(s) of Agricultural Development Bank Plc hereby appoint ______________________________________or failing him, DAASEBRE AKUAMOAH AGYAPONG II, Chairman of Agricultural Development Bank Plc, P. O. Box 4191, Accra, as my/our proxy to vote for me/us on my/our behalf at the Annual General Meeting of the Company to be held at the 4th Floor, Accra Financial Centre, Accra at eleven o’clock (11:00am) in the forenoon on August 9, 2023 and at any adjournment thereof.
Please indicate with a tick in the space below how you wish your votes to be cast
Resolutions 
For Against Abstain
1. To receive and consider the financial 
statements of the company for the year ended December 31,2022 together with the reports of directors and auditors thereon
2. To re-elect the following directors retiring by rotation under the Companies Act 2019 (Act 992):
i. Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II
ii.    Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah
iii.   Hon.Alhaji Habib Iddrisu2(i) 
2(ii)
2(iii)
3. To authorise the directors to fix the 
remuneration of the auditors for the financial year ending December 31,20233
Dated this ___________________________ day of __________________________ 2023
Signed_____________________________________________2The Peopleʼs Bank
PROXY2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements118Proxy
Annual Report and Financial StatementsTHIS FORM SHOULD NOT BE COMPLETED AND SENT TO THE SECRETARY IF THE SENDER WILL BE ATTENDING 
THE MEETING.
1. Provision has been made on the form for DAASEBRE AKUAMOAH AGYAPONG II, the Chairman of the Meeting, to 
act as your Proxy but if you so wish, you may insert in the blank space the name of any person whether a member of the company or not who will attend the meeting and vote on your behalf instead of the Chairman.
2. In the case of joint holder, each holder must sign. In case of a company, the Proxy Form must be signed by a Director 
and its Common Seal appended. 
If you intend to sign a Proxy, please sign the above Proxy Form and post/submit it to reach the Registrar, Central 
Securities Depository, Cedi House, Accra within 48 hours before the meeting.119         2022 Annual Report & Financial Statements119
Ease your 
financial burdenwith ourpersonal loan products
PERSONAL 
LOAN TO P UP 
Top up loan after 6 months 
Unlimited loan amount, depending
on af fordability / Net salary
Loan within 48hrs
Competitive Rate
Extended  Tenor
For further enquiries please
visit the near est Branch or call:
0593 844 898
0593 845 845REGULAR 
PERSONAL LOAN
ADB customers and non
customers on controller payrol l
Unlimited loan amount, depending 
on af fordability / Net salary
Loan within 48hrs
Competitive Rat e
Up to 72 months
 ADB P AYDAY PLUS
SALARY  ADVANCE
ADB salary account customers onl y
 Access 80% of monthly salar y
 
 No interest  
Repay within 30 days
Terms and conditions apply 

Extracted from: Website_2021-ADB-Annual-Report.pdf
1         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 121  ANN UAL 
  REP    RT
 AND FINANCI AL STATEMENTS2         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 2
3         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 32120
Vision 
To be the people’s Bank, harnessing the transformational 
power of agribusiness for wealth creation.
Mission
Growing a strong customer-centric Bank, providing 
profitable and diversified financial  services for a sustained 
contribution to agricultural  development and wealth 
creation.
Core Values
Trust It is the currency that makes it possible for us to 
work together, build integrity and earn the right to be the 
people’s bank. 
Innovation We will embrace our responsibility solve 
problems and consistently add value to our customers. 
Proactiveness By putting ourselves in the customers 
shoes we will be timely in honouring our service promise.VISION, MISSION & CORE VALUES4         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 42120
TABLE OF CONTENT
Notice of Meeting  05
Resolutions to be Pass at the Annual General Meeting 06
Corporate Information 07
Report of the Directors 08
Information on Key Management Personnel  21
Report from Board Chairman  26
Report from Managing Director 29
Independent Auditor’s Report 32
Statement of Profit or Loss 36
Statement of Comprehensive Income                                                                       37
Statement of Financial Position 38
Statement of Changes in Equity 39
Statement of Cash Flows 41
Notes to the Financial Statements 42
Value Added Statement Appendix I
Shareholders’ Information Appendix II
About Us 103
Proxy Form         115 5         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 52120
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT the 35th Annual 
General Meeting of Agricultural Development Bank Plc 
will be held virtually and streamed live to shareholders 
on https://agricbankagm.com from the 4th Floor, 
Accra Financial Centre, Ridge, Accra at 11.00 a.m. on 
Wednesday August 10, 2022  to transact the following 
business:
AGENDA
Ordinary Resolutions
1. To receive and consider the  financial statements and 
reports of directors and auditors for the year ended 
31st December 2021;
2. To re-elect the following directors retiring by rotation:
• George Kwabena Abankwah-Yeboah; 
• Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare;
3. To approve the remuneration of directors;
4. To authorise the dxirectors to fix the remuneration of 
the auditors for the financial year ending December 
31, 2022;
Dated this 15th day of July, 2022 
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD 
SGD. 
GODWYLL ANSAH
COMPANY SECRETARY
NOTES:
1. Due to the corona virus pandemic attendance and 
participation by members or their proxies in the 
meeting shall be by virtual means (I.e. through an 
electronic platform with audio-visual capacity which 
provides members or their proxies reasonable and 
fair opportunities to participate and engage with the 
directors and auditors);
2. A member who is unable to attend the General Meeting 
is entitled to appoint a proxy to attend and vote on his/ 
her/its behalf. A proxy need not be a member of the 
company;
3. A proxy form can be downloaded from www.agricbank. 
com and may be filled and sent via email to info@ 
csd.com.gh or deposited at the company’s Registrar, 
Central Securities Depository on 4th Floor, Cedi 
House, Liberia Road, Accra, or posted to the Registrar 
at PMB CT 465 Cantonment, Accra to arrive at any time during working hours not less than forty-eight 
hours prior to the commencement of the meeting.
4. All relevant documents in connection with the meeting 
are available to shareholders from the date of this 
notice on the Company’s website (www.agricbank..
com).
5. Accessing and voting at the virtual AGM: A unique 
token number will be sent to shareholders by email 
and /or SMS from August 5, 2022 to give them access 
to the meeting. Shareholders who do not receive the 
token can contact the CSD on: info@csd.com.gh or 
call 0302 906576/0303 972254 any time after August 
7, 2022 but before the date of the AGM to be sent the 
unique token.
6. To gain access to the virtual AGM, shareholders must 
visit: https://agricbankagm.com and input their unique 
token number on Wednesday, August 10, 2022. For 
shareholders who do not submit proxy forms to the 
Registrar of the company prior to the meeting, they 
may vote electronically during the virtual AGM again 
using their unique token number. Further assistance 
on accessing the meeting and voting electronically 
can be found on https://agricbankagm.com. For further 
information, please contact
The Registrar:
Central Securities Depository (CSD) Ghana Limited,
4th floor, Cedi House, Accra
Tel: (233) 0302 906576/0303 972254
Email: info@csd.com.gh
The Board of Directors will propose the following ordinary 
resolutions, which will be put to the Annual General
Meeting for consideration and approval:
1. To receive and consider the Financial Statements 
and Reports of the directors and auditors for the 
Year ended 31st December 2021;
The Board will lay before the Annual General 
Meeting for consideration the audited accounts 
of the company for 2021, and the reports of the 
directors and auditors thereon, as a true and fair 
view of the state of affairs of the company for the 
year ended December 31, 2021, and will propose 
the following resolution:
That the accounts of the company for the year 
ended December 31, 2021 and the reports of the 
directors and auditor thereon be and are hereby 
deemed duly considered.NOTICE OF MEETING6         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 62. To re-elect to the following directors retiring by 
rotation
The following directors of the company; Mr. 
George Kwabena Abankwah-Yeboah and Hon. 
Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare will retire by rotation in 
accordance with section 325 of the Companies Act, 
2019 (Act 992) and clause 76 of the Constitution 
of the company. Mr. George Kwabena Abankwah-
Yeboah and Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare all being 
eligible for re-election, have offered themselves 
to be re-elected as directors of the company. The 
Board will recommend that they be so re-elected 
and will propose the following resolutions:
i. That Mr. George Kwabena Abankwah-Yeboah, 
who is retiring by rotation and who, being eligible, 
has offered himself for re-election in accordance 
with clause 76 of the company’s Constitution and 
section 325 of the Companies Act, 2019, be and 
is hereby re-elected as a director of the company.
 
ii. That Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare who is 
retiring by rotation and who, being eligible, has 
offered herself for re-election in accordance with 
clause 76 of the company’s Constitution and 
section 325 of the Companies Act, 2019, be and 
is hereby re-elected as a director of the company.
3. To approve the remuneration of the directors:  In 
accordance with section 185 of the Companies 
Act, 2019 (Act 992) and clause 82 of the 
Constitution of the company, the Board will request 
that shareholders approve the remuneration of the 
Executive Director and Non-Executive Directors 
as disclosed in Note 41 of the 2021 Annual Report 
of the company. The following resolutions will be 
proposed:i. That in accordance with section 185 of the 
Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and clause 82 
of the Constitution of the company, approval be 
and is hereby given for the remuneration of the 
Managing Director, Dr. John Kofi Mensah on 
substantially the same terms as existed in his 
previous contract as detailed in Note 41.
ii. In accordance with section 185 of the 
Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and clause 82 
of the Constitution of the company, the Board 
will request that shareholders approve the 
remuneration payable to non-executive directors 
to be an amount not exceeding an aggregate of 
GHS 276,000.00 as fees and sitting allowances 
per director per annum. This amount represents 
a 15% upward revision of the previous fees 
and allowances to reflect inflation. These 
fees and allowances shall be applied until the 
Shareholders shall revise it.
4. To authorise the directors to fix the remuneration of 
the Auditors for the financial year ending  December 
31, 2022;
In accordance with section 140 of the Companies 
Act, 2019, the Board will request that they be 
authorised to fix the fees of the external auditor 
Ernst & Young, for the year ended December 31, 
2022. The following resolution will be proposed:
That the directors be and are hereby authorised to 
fix the remuneration of the auditor in respect of the 
year ended December 31, 2022.7         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 72120
CORPORATE INFORMATION
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II   ||  Chairman (Appointed effective September 1,2021)
Mr. Alex Bernasko   ||  Chairman (Retired effective August 31, 2021)
Dr. John Kofi Mensah   ||  Managing Director
Mr. George Kwabena Abankwah Yeboah   ||  Non - Executive Director
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie   ||  Non - Executive Director
Prof. Peter Quartey   ||  Non - Executive Director
Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare   ||  Non - Executive Director
Mr. Evron Rothschild Hughes   ||  Non - Executive Director 
Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah   ||  Non - Executive Director (Appointed effective September 1, 2021)
Hon. Habib Iddrisu   ||  Non - Executive Director (Appointed effective September 1, 2021)
Hon Dr. Mark Assibey-Yeboah   ||  Non - Executive Director (Retired effective August 31, 2021)
COMPANY SECRETARY
Mr. Godwyll Ansah
Accra Financial Centre
3rd Ambassadorial Development Area
P. O. Box 4191
Accra
REGISTERED OFFICE
Accra Financial Centre
3rd Ambassadorial Development Area
P. O. Box 4191
Accra
AUDITORS
Ernst & Young 
Chartered Accountants
60 Rangoon Lane
Cantonments City
P. O. Box KA 16009, 
Airport
Accra, Ghana8         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 82120
REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS
Directors’ Responsibility Statement
The directors are responsible for the preparation of financial statements that give a true and fair view of Agricultural 
Development Bank Plc (ADB), comprising the Statement of Financial Position at as 31 December 2021, and the 
Statements of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive Income, Changes In Equity and Cash Flows for the year then 
ended, and the notes to the financial statements which include a summary of significant accounting policies and other 
explanatory notes, in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards and in the manner required by the 
Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised Deposit–Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930). In 
addition, the directors are responsible for the preparation of the report of the directors.
The directors are also responsible for such internal controls as the directors determine is necessary to enable the 
preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and for 
maintaining adequate accounting records and an effective system of risk management.
The directors have assessed the ability of the Bank to continue as a going concern and have no reason to believe that 
the business will not be a going concern in the year ahead.
The auditor is responsible for reporting on whether the financial statements give a true and fair view in accordance with 
the applicable financial reporting framework.
Corporate Social Responsibility
Amounts spent on corporate social responsibility amounted to GH¢4m (2020:GH¢4m). These included best farmer 
sponsorship, donations to schools and others of national interest.
Financial Statements Review
The financial results of the Bank for the year ended 31 December 2021 are set out in the attached financial results, 
highlights of which are as follows:
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Profit  after tax (attributable to equity holders) 81,602  65,403
to which is added the balance brought forward 
On accumulated losses (252,236) (289,349)
(170,633) (223,946)
Out of which is transferred to:
The statutory reserve in accordance with section 34 of the Banking Act. (40,801) (32,702)
Transaction cost related to Right issue                                                                                                         - (327)
Transfer from/(to) credit risk reserve (25,210)   4,739 
Leaving a balance to be carried forward of (236,645) (252,236)
Five-year Financial Highlights
2021 2020 2019 2018 2017
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Total assets                                                                              6,454,119 5,715,794 4,577,659 3,597,395 3,545,143
Loans and advances to customers (net) 2,282,312 1,911,988 1,468,653 1,068,814 1,139,356
Deposits from customers 4,927,216 4,281,037 3,392,209 2,586,265 2,541,010
Shareholders’ equity 938,255 850,623 793,384 639,711 479,013
Profit/(Loss)before tax 126,097 97,690 17,884 34,057 47,339
Profit/(Loss) after tax 81,602 65,403 14,823 5,908 26,5109         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 9Earnings per share (Ghana pesewas): 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017
Basic 23.52 18.85 6.00 3.00 11.00
Diluted 23.52 18.85 4.00 3.00 11.00
Return on equity (%) 12.09 7.69 1.87 0.92 6.00
Return on assets (%) 1.81 1.14 0.32 0.16 1.00
Number of staff     1,481 1,460 1,489 1,195 1,179
Number of branches and agencies 86 82 82 82 78
The Bank recorded profit after tax of GH¢81,602 (2020: GH¢65,403) for the year under review and there was transfer 
to the Statutory Reserve from Retained earnings during the year GH¢40,801 (2020: GH¢32,702).  The cumulative 
balance on the Statutory Reserve Fund at the year-end was GH¢ç182, 015 (2020: GH¢141,214).
Dividend  
The directors do not recommend the payment of dividend.  The directors consider the state of the Bank‘s affairs to be 
satisfactory.
Nature of Business
The Bank is registered to carry on the business of Universal Banking. The Bank’s principal activities comprise corporate 
banking and retail banking. There was no change in the nature of business of the company during the year.
The objective of the Bank is to provide unique Universal Banking products and services with emphasis on agribusiness 
to both local and international clients.
Shareholding
The Bank is listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange. The Bank’s shareholding structure at the end of the year was as 
follows:
 Shareholder Names  No. of shares held % Holding
1 FINANCIAL INVESTMENT TRUST (FIT)  222,218,113 64.05%
2 GOVERNMENT OF GHANA  74,579,327 21.50%
3 GHANA AMALGAMATED TRUST PLC  39,076,924 11.26%
4 ESOP  5,983,828 1.72%
5 DOE, OSCAR YAO O. Y. D.  2,631,681 0.76%
6 COFIE, MARK BLEWUNYO KODJO M. B. K. C.  2,100,629 0.61%
7 NANA, SOGLO ALLOH IV  54,800 0.02%
8PARACELSUS PHARMACY & MARKETING CONSULTANCY LTD,  
P. P. M. C. L. 50,000 0.01%
9 BONDZI-SIMPSON, LESLIE  26,600 0.01%
10 MR, JOHN BEKUIN-WURAPA  20,000 0.01%
SUBTOTAL of TOP 10  346,741,902 99.94%
Others  210,351 0.06%
TOTAL  346,952,253 100.00%
Related Party Transactions
Information regarding directors’ interests in equity shares of the Bank and remuneration is disclosed in Note 41 to the 
financial statements as well as those related to associated company. Other than their contracts as directors, no director 
had a material interest in any contract to which the Bank was a party during the year. Related party transactions and 
balances are also disclosed in Note 41 to the financial statements. Related party transactions which are credit related 
starts with the Credit and Risk Committee. On presentation to the Board, the affected directors disclose their interest 
and recuse themselves from the deliberations. The approval is subsequently given, and balances are also disclosed in 
Note 41 to the financial statements.
Auditor 
The auditors, Ernst and Young, have indicated their willingness to continue in office in accordance with Section 139(5) 
of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) as well as Sections 81(4) and 81(5) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking 10         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 10Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930). Amount of audit fee payable as at 31 December 2021 was GH¢816,000.
Particulars of Entries in the Interest Register
One director made a disclosure of an interest which was entered in the interest register during the year.11         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 112120PROFILE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Name Nationality Age Position Other Directorships Held
Daasebre Akuamoah 
Agyapong IIGhanaian 38Board Chairman
(from September 1, 2021)Sejukab Company Limited
Alex Bernasko Ghanaian 69Board Chairman
(Retired on August 31, 2021)
Mrs. Mary Abla 
KessieGhanaian 66Independent/
Non-Executive Director• Family Health University College and 
Medical School
• Zeepay Ghana Limited  
Prof. Peter Quartey Ghanaian 53Independent/
Non-Executive Director• Startrite Montessori School 
• Institute of Statistical
ISSER (Institute of Statistical Social 
and Economic Research is one entity)
Hon. Mrs. Abena 
Osei-AsareGhanaian 43 Non-Executive Director• Social Security and National Insurance 
Trust
• Ghana Export-Import Bank (GEXIM)
• Ghana Integrated Aluminium  
Development Corporation (GIADEC)
Mr. George Kwabena 
Abankwah-YeboahGhanaian 61 Non-Executive Director• Sharp Pharmaceuticals Ltd 
• Gulf Consolidated Limited
• Kyauto Ghana Limited
Hon. Dr. Mark 
Assibey-Yeboah Ghanaian 47Non-executive Director 
(Retired on  August 31, 2021)
Mr. Evron Rothschild 
HughesGhanaian 51 Non-Executive Director
Dr. John Kofi Mensah Ghanaian 60 Managing Director• Ghana International Bank Plc
• Enyan Denkyira Rural Bank
• GET Fund
• Venture Capital Trust Fund
Hon. Habib Iddrisu Ghanaian 36Non-Executive Director 
(from September 1, 2021)
Prof. Eric Yirenkyi 
Danquah Ghanaian 63Independent / Non-
Executive Director
(from 01/09/2021)• Eric Danquah Foundation 
• African Plant Breeders Association
• West Africa Centre for Crop 
Improvement (University of Ghana)ProfileBOARD OF DIRECTORS12         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 12Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II 
Independent and Non-Executive Director
Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II was appointed the Chairman of the Board effective 
September 1, 2021. He is 38 years old.
Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II is the Kwawuhene and the President of the Kwahu 
Traditional Council. He is also the Vice President of the Eastern Regional House of Chiefs. 
Daasebre previously worked as Audit Associate at KPMG (2006 - 2009) Account Clerk at 
Health Net (MHNGS), San Rafael, CA, USA (02/2010– 01/2011) and Inventory Manager 
at SEJUKAB Enterprise. He was the Superintendent Management Accountant (Capital 
and Cost) of Abosso Goldfields Ltd Ghana (09/2011 –08/2013), Consultant for Thonket 
Company Ltd. / Thonket Plantpool Ltd (1/1/2015- 31/08/2016) and Director of KAYROCK 
Co. Ltd.
Daasebre is a Chartered Accountant by profession (Association of Chartered Certified 
Accountants (ACCA)-UK – Member) and further holds BSc. Administration-(Accounting 
Option) University of Ghana and MBA-Finance and Investment Banking from Lincoln 
University – California, USA. He is currently pursuing a law degree at the GIMPA Law 
School.
Alex Bernasko
Independent and Non-Executive Director
Mr. Bernasko was appointed the Chairman of the Board in August 2017. He is 69 years old. 
He is a Legal Practitioner and Notary Public. He has served on several Boards including 
the Export Development and Investment Fund (EDIF) and Ghana Tourist Development 
Company. His work experience includes former Secretary to the Bank of Ghana and then 
Advisor and member of the Bank of Ghana’s top management.
He holds a BA (Hons Social Sciences) from KNUST, Qualifying Certificate in Law from 
the University of Ghana, Legon and Barrister-at-Law from the Ghana School of Law. He 
also holds certificates for courses attended in several institutions including the Royal 
Institute of Public Administration U.K. and the International Monetary Fund, U.S.A. He is 
a member of the Ghana Bar Association, International Bar Association and the Institute 
of Directors, Ghana.
Mr. Bernasko retired in August 2021.
Biographical Information of Directors
The Board of Director consists of an Independent Non-Executive Chairman, three (3) other Independent 
Non-Executive Directors, four (4) Non-Executive Directors and one (1) Managing Director. 
The Independent Non-Executive Directors are directors who in the reasonable opinion of the Bank of Ghana, 
are able to exercise independent judgement in relation to their role as directors and are not employees, civil 
or public servants or other government officials, persons with direct links with government, or persons who 
are actively engaged in party politics. 
Non-Executive Directors are independent of management and free from management constraints that could 
interfere with the exercise of their objective and independent judgments. The directors collectively possess 
strong functional knowledge, expertise, and experience to make valuable contributions to the Bank.BIOGRAPHY OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS13         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 13Mr. George Kwabena Abankwah-Yeboah 
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Abankwah-Yeboah was appointed to the Board of the Bank in August 2017. He 
is 61 years old. He is the Chief Executive Officer of Sharp Pharmaceuticals Limited. 
He is currently a director of United Perfumery and Pharmaceuticals Limited, and Gulf 
Consolidated Limited. He has previously served on several boards including Accra 
Technical University, CSRI STEPRI, Koforidua Technical University, and the Association 
of Ghana Industries.
He holds a Bachelor of Pharmacy (Hons) from KNUST, MBA (Finance) and an LLB (Hons) 
from the University of Ghana, Legon. He once served as member, commercial court user 
committee, member, pharmaceutical manufacturers association of ghana  and also a 
fellow of the ghana college of pharmacist.
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie
Independent Non-Executive Director
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie was appointed to the board of the Bank in August 2018. She is 66 
years old. She is a lawyer, a Notary Public, a certified Director and Corporate Governance 
expert.
Mrs. Kessie previously served on the Boards of British Telecom Global Services, and 
Kosmos Energy LLC. She has a wealth of knowledge and experience in the banking and 
financial services sector and held several positions during her banking car eer.
She holds a Bachelor of Laws degree from the University of Ghana and a Barrister at Law 
from the Ghana School of Law. She is a member of the Ghana Bar Association and the 
Institute of Directors, Ghana.
Prof. Peter Quartey
Independent and Non-Executive Director
Prof. Peter Quartey was appointed to the Board of the Bank in August 2018. He is 53 
years old. He is currently the Director of institute of Statistical, Social and Economic 
Research at the University of Ghana, Legon. He is a former Head of the Department of 
Economics and a former Director of Economic Policy Management at the University of 
Ghana, Legon. He had previously served on a number of boards including the University of 
Ghana Credit Union, National Population Council, and the Finance and General Purpose 
Committee at the University of Ghana, where he was also a member of the University of 
Ghana Strategy Committee. 
Prof. Quartey has also provided consultancy services to various institutions including 
NEPAD, World Bank, African Development Bank, and USAID. He has several publications 
to his credit. He holds a Ph.D. in Development Economics from the University of 
Manchester, an MPhil. In Economics from University of Ghana and an MSc Quantitative 
Development Economics from University of Warwick (UK).
Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare
Non-Executive Director
Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare was appointed to the Board in August 2018. She is 43 years 
old. She is the Deputy Minister of Finance and Member of Parliament for Atiwa-East 
Constituency. Abena previously worked with the New York University (NYU) Ghana and 
Barclays Bank (Ghana) Limited. She is a director of Ghana Exim Bank, Social Security 
and National Insurance Trust and Ghana Integrated Aluminium Development Corporation. 
She previously served as a director of National Health Insurance Authority and Coastal 
Development Authority.
She holds a BA (Economics and Geography) and an MSc (Development Finance) from 
the University of Ghana, Legon. She is also a Chartered Accountant.
14         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 14
Hon. Dr. Mark Assibey-Yeboah 
Non-Executive Director
Dr. Mark Assibey-Yeboah was appointed to the Board in August 2018. He is 46 years 
old. He is the immediate past Member of Parliament for New Juaben South. He is also 
the immediate past Chairman of the Finance Committee of the Parliament of Ghana. He 
previously worked as a Senior Economist at the Bank of Ghana.
He holds a BSc (Hons Agricultural Economics) from KNUST, and an MS (Agricultural and 
Resource Economics) from the University of Delaware, USA. He also holds an MA and a 
Ph.D. both in Economics from the University of Tennessee, USA.
He retired in August 2021.
Mr. Evron Rothschild Hughes 
Non –Executive Director 
Mr. Evron Rothschild Hughes was appointed to the Board effective August 12, 2020. He is 51 
years old. A development economist, investment banker, and branding & communications 
consultant with over two decades of multi-industry, professional experience at the board, 
executive, consulting, and entrepreneurial levels, Mr. Hughes has worked in the United 
Kingdom, South Africa, Rwanda, and Ghana. He is currently an Economic Advisor at The 
Presidency (Republic of Ghana).
A Cambridge Commonwealth Trust scholar, Mr. Hughes holds an MPhil in Development 
Studies as well as an Executive Certificate in Fintech Innovation (Judge Business School) 
from Cambridge University, United Kingdom. He also holds an Executive MBA in Finance 
from the University of Ghana Business School and a BA (Hons), Summa Cum Laude, in 
Political Science with Philosophy from the University of Ghana. 
Habib Iddrisu 
Non –Executive Director 
Hon. Alhaji Habib Iddrisu was appointed to the Board effective September 1, 2021. He is 
35 years old. He is the Member of Parliament for the Tolon Constituency and the Deputy 
Majority Chief Whip in the Parliament of Ghana. Prior to his election as a Member of 
Parliament, he held notable leadership positions in both the public and private sectors 
in Ghana and abroad. These include Deputy Head, Ghana Free Zones Authority (Tema 
Processing Zone) (April 2017 – December 2020), Chief Executive Officer, Fadhab 
Investment Company Limited, Ghana (June, 2017- date).
He holds Bachelor’s Degree in Communication Studies from African University College 
of Communications (AUCC)  and other relevant career certificates including Graduate 
Certificate of Arts in Human Resource Management from The University of Notre Dame, 
Australia, Diploma of Leadership and Management, Cambridge International College, 
Australia and Certificate in Administration and Management from Ghana Institute of 
Management and Public Administration (GIMPA).  Hon. Alhaji Habib Iddrisu is currently 
pursuing EMBA at GIMPA.
15         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 15
Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah 
Independent  and Non –Executive Director 
Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah was appointed to the Board effective September 1, 2021. 
Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah is a 63-year-old Professor of Plant Genetics at the University 
of Ghana. 
He holds BSc. Agric (Crop Science), University of Ghana, MPhil Plant Breeding, University 
of Cambridge, England and PhD Genetics, University of Cambridge, England.
He is a former Head of Department, Department of Crop Science, University of Ghana, 
Legon and a former Dean, International Programmes, University of Ghana. He is the 
founding Director of West Africa Centre for Crop Improvement, University of Ghana 
and the 2018 Laureate, Global Confederation of Higher Education Associations for the 
Agricultural and Life Sciences (GCHERA), World Agriculture Prize (WAP).
    
Professor Danquah is a visiting Scientist, Department of Global Development, College 
of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, USA and adjunct Professor, 
Institute of Agriculture, University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia. He is the President, 
African Plant Breeders Association, (APBA) and Founder, Eric Danquah Foundation. He 
has several publications to his credit.
Dr. John Kofi Mensah 
Managing Director
Dr. John Kofi Mensah is the Managing Director of the Bank. He was appointed the 
Managing Director of the Bank on August 1, 2017. He is 60 years. Dr. John Kofi Mensah 
is a renowned Economist and Banker with 29 years of experience in different sectors 
of banking ranging from start-up and delinquent banks operations, credit and treasury 
management of universal banks. Prior to this appointment, he held various positions at the 
Bank for Housing and Construction, Securities Discount Company (SDC), International 
Commercial Bank (now FBN Bank), Unibank, First Capital Bank and also served as board 
member at Cocoa Processing Company, Ghana Telecom University and Family Fountain 
Assets & Securities Limited 
He holds a doctorate in Business Administration (Finance) from the University of Zurich, 
Switzerland. He holds an MSc (Banking and Finance), Cum Laude from Finafrica in Milan, 
Italy and a BA (Economics & Statistics) from the University of Ghana-Legon.
16         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 16Biographical information of Directors
Age Category Number of Directors
Up to – 40 years 2
41 – 60 years 4
Above 60 years 5
Commitment to Corporate Governance
i.  Good corporate governance for enhanced   
 shareholder value.
ii.  Clearly defined respective roles of Shareholders,   
 Board of Directors and Management in the   
 governance architecture.
iii.  The Board of Directors should have majority   
 of its membership as either Independent    
 or  Non-Executive directors have been    
 articulated in a number of corporate    
 documents, including the Bank’s Constitution   
 and the Board Charter.
iv. There is a Board Charter which spells out the   
 functions and powers of the Board and Board   
 Sub-Committees. There are also various policies   
 which define the role of the Board and the   
 Managing Director with regard to certain specific  
 matters including staff hiring and discipline.
The Board of Directors
The Board is responsible for setting the institution’s 
strategic direction, leading and controlling the institution 
and monitoring activities of Executive Management.
As at 31 December 2021, the Board of Directors of 
Agricultural Development Bank Plc consisted of nine (9) 
members made up of an Independent Non-executive 
Chairman, three (3) other Independent Non-Executive 
Directors, four (4) Non-executive Directors, and one (1) 
Executive Director. 
The Board members have a wide range of experiences 
and in-depth knowledge in management, economics, 
finance, law and industry, which enable them to make 
informed decisions and valuable contributions to the 
Bank’s progress.   
The Board has delegated various aspects of its work to the  
Credit and Risk, Audit, IT, Research & Strategy, Human 
Resource and Governance and Cyber and Information 
Security Board Sub-Committees.
Board Credit and Risk Committee
The role of the Committee includes:
i. Assisting Management in the recognition of risks 
and also to ensure that the Board is made aware of 
inherent and emerging risks and to review all risks to which the Bank is exposed, assess from time to 
time their relative importance and evaluate whether 
the resources and controls designed to manage 
each risk are proportionate to the quantum of risk 
involved.
ii. It reviews and approves the credit risk strategy and 
credit risk policies of the Bank. It assists Management 
in evaluating the overall credit risks faced by the 
Bank and sets an acceptable risk appetite and 
tolerance the Bank is willing to engage and the 
level of profitability the Bank expects to achieve for 
booking the various credits. The management of 
credit risk largely encompasses activities relating 
to loans and advances, albeit that credit risks 
exists throughout the other activities of the Bank 
both on and off balance sheet. These activities 
include acceptances, inter-bank transactions, trade 
financing, foreign exchange transactions, futures, 
swaps, options and guarantees etc.;
iii. It reviews operational and market risks faced by the 
Bank and the management of such risks;
iv. It ensures the establishment in the Bank of 
a compliance culture including Anti-Money 
Laundering and Combating the Financing of 
Terrorism (“AML/CFT” ) risk management culture 
and promote the adoption of an appropriate ethical 
and compliance standards in the conduct of the 
business of the Bank.
v. The review of risks with a frequency that it judges 
to be proportionate to their materiality to the Bank 
paying particular attention to new risks arising from 
changes in the Bank’s business strategy and those 
arising from the wider current commercial, economic 
and political environment. The Committee reviews 
the comprehensiveness of record of risks from time 
to time and updates it where appropriate.
vi. The consideration prior to implementation of all 
new products, significant changes in the business 
of the Bank or scale of its operations in any area. 
The consideration of all proposed changes to key 
systems and operational controls, management 
structure and key responsibilities of the senior 
management team.
vii. Assisting management in the recognition of risks 
and also to ensure that the Board is made aware of 
changes in the risk profile arising from:
  -   Asset quality concentration
  -   Counterparty limits17         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 17  -  Currency, maturity and interest rate mismatches
  -   The external environment, including country risk  
    for any country where the Bank has a significant       
              exposure
  -   Business strategy and competition
          -   Operational risk, including vulnerability to fraud,       
             human resources and business continuity
  -   Legal, compliance and reputational risk
viii. The committee annually reviews its terms of 
reference and modus operandi and makes 
recommendations for changes that it considers 
appropriate to the Board.
The composition of the Committee is as follows:
Name of Director Position
Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare Chairperson
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie Member
Mr. Kwabena Abankwah-Yeboah Member
Mr. Evron Hughes Member 
Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah 
(from September 2021)Member
Board Audit Committee
The role of the committee includes:
i. Providing oversight for the financial reporting 
process including the establishment of accounting 
policies and practices by the Bank;
 
ii. Providing oversight for Internal and external audit 
functions;
 
iii. Reviewing and approving the audit scope, depth, 
coverage and frequency and overall effectiveness;
 
iv. Review and monitor the external auditors’ 
independence and objectivity, taking into 
consideration relevant professional and regulatory 
requirements;
 
v. Review coordination between the internal audit 
function and external auditors;
 
vi. Receiving key audit reports and ensuring that 
Executive Management is taking necessary 
corrective actions in a timely manner to address 
control deviations and weaknesses, non-compliance 
with policies, laws and regulations;
 
vii. Providing a linkage between the Board and the Bank 
of Ghana, reviewing inspection reports, reviewing 
guidelines and circulars and ensuring compliance;
viii. Annually recommending to the Board and Annual 
General Meeting (AGM), the appointment of the 
External Auditor, the audit fee and to advise the 
Board on any questions of resignation or dismissal 
of the External Auditors.ix. To keep under review the Bank’s policy on non-
audit services provided by the External Auditors and 
recommend this to the Board having due regard to 
ensuring that the provision of such services does 
not impair the External Auditor’s independence or 
objectivity.
The composition of the Committee is as follows:
Name of Director Position
Prof. Peter Quartey Chairman
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie Member
Mr. Evron Hughes Member
Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah Member
IT, Research and Strategy Sub-Committee:
The role of the committee includes: 
i. Providing leadership in the implementation of IT 
policy strategy for the entire Bank that will lead to 
effective use of IT to drive the Bank’s business;
ii. Reviewing and recommending for full Board approval 
all IT Policies recommended by the Management;
iii. Overseeing the deployment of new and cost-
effective IT solutions with a view to monitoring 
enhancing product quality, customer service delivery 
and reviewing their risk exposures to the Bank;
iv. Reviewing any significant IT incidents that have 
occurred and monitor trends in repeat incidences;
v. Recommending for the approval of the full Board, 
any sourcing/introduction of new IT solutions in the 
Bank with a view to determining their sustainability 
for the Bank’s business;
vi. Reviewing the formulation and monitoring of the 
implementation of approved Strategic Plan of the 
Bank;
vii. Clearly determining for full Board approval, the 
annual Key Performance Indicators for Executive   
Management based on the approved Strategic Plan;
viii. Proposing for full Board approval, the reward 
for Executive Management upon attainment of 
approved performance targets and Key Performance 
Indicators;
ix. Advising the Board, in accordance with the approved 
Strategic Plan, in the allocation of resources of the 
Bank on a rational basis for sound commercial 
reasons;
Name of Director Position
Mr. Kwabena Abankwah-Yeboah Chairperson
Prof. Peter Quartey Member
Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II Member
Hon. Habib Iddrisu Member18         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 18Board Human Resource and 
Governance Committee
The role of the committee includes: 
i. Reviewing and making recommendations to the 
Board with respect to the size and composition of 
the Board, including reviewing Board succession 
plans;
ii. Assisting the Board as required in relation to the 
performance evaluation of the Board, its Committees 
and individual Directors; 
iii. Making recommendation to the Board on the 
appointment of the Managing Director, other 
Executives and Key Management Personnel;
iv. Reviewing and making recommendations on 
the remuneration strategy and packages of the 
Managing Director and other Key Management 
Personnel;
v. Reviewing reports on Senior Staff grievance and 
discipline and making recommendations to the 
Board.
vi. Considering and recommending to the Board an 
overall employment, compensation, performance 
management, retention and severance policy and 
philosophy for the Bank that is aligned with the 
Bank’s medium- and long-term business strategy..
vii. Having a strategic oversight of matters relating to 
the development of the Bank’s human resources 
with the main objective of attracting and retaining a 
competitive human resources base for the Bank.
The composition of the Committee is as follows:
Name of Director Position
Mr. Evron Rothschild Hughes Chairman
Prof. Peter Quartey Member
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie Member
Hon. Habib Iddrisu Member
Cyber and Information Security Sub-Committee 
Committee
The role of the committee includes:
i. Determining the nature and extent of the significant 
cyber and information security risks the Bank is 
willing to take in achieving its strategic objectives;ii. Identifying the cyber and information Security 
risks inherent in the business of the Bank, the 
control processes with respect to such risks and 
countermeasures;
iii. Outlining the enterprise and overall cyber and 
information security risk profile of the Bank;
iv. Ensuring the adequacy and effectiveness of the 
Cyber and Information Security risk management 
framework of the Bank;
v. Effectiveness of the information technology 
governance and its operations in the Bank;
vi. Determining the cyber and information security risk 
management strategy of the Bank; and
The composition of the Committee is as follows:
Name of Director Position
Mr. Kwabena Abankwah-Yeboah Chairperson
Prof. Peter Quartey Member
Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II Member
Hon. Habib Iddrisu Member
Schedule of attendance at Board and Committee 
Meetings
The Board met seventeen (17) times during the year and 
the Board Sub-Committees, cumulatively, twenty-two (22) 
times.
Below is the schedule of attendance at Board and Board 
Sub-Committee meetings during the year.
*Board (B), Audit Committee (AC), Credit and Risk 
Committee (RCC), Human Resource and Governance 
Committee (HRGC), IT, Research and Strategy/Cyber & 
Information Security Sub-Committee (ITRS/CIS), N/A as 
used above implies ‘Not applicable’ that is, the Director 
in question was not a member of the stated committee 
and hence could not have been expected to attend the 
Committee meeting.19         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 19 Director B AC CRC HRCH ITRS/CIS
Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II 6 N/A N/A N/A 2
Mr. Alex Bernasko 11 N/A N/A N/A 3
Dr. John Kofi Mensah 17 6 `6 5 5
Mr. Evron Hughes 17 6 6 5 N/A
Mr. George K. Abankwah-Yeboah 13 3 5 N/A 5
Dr. Mark Assibey-Yeboah 10 N/A N/A 2 2
Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare 11 N/A 6 0 N/A
Prof. Peter Quartey 17 6 N/A 3 5
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie 17 6 4 5 N/A
Hon. Habib Iddrisu 5 N/A N/A N/A 1
Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah 6 2 2 N/A N/A
Board balance and independence
The composition of the Board of Directors and its Sub-
Committees is regularly reviewed to ensure that the 
balance and mix of skills, independence, knowledge and 
experience is maintained.
Code of Conduct, Ethics Charter and Conflict of 
Interest Policies
The Board has approved Ethics Charter and Conflict of 
Interest policy that regulate the conduct of Directors.  In 
addition, an approved Code of Conduct regulate the 
Conduct of all employees. Management has communicated 
the principles in the Bank’s Code of Conduct to   
employees to provide guidance in the discharge of their 
duties.  The above-mentioned policies set the standards 
of professionalism and integrity required for the Bank’s 
operations, which cover compliance with applicable laws, 
conflict of interest, environmental issues, reliability of 
financial reporting, bribery and strict adherence to laid 
down procedures, to eliminate the potential for illegal and 
unethical practices.
Anti-Money Laundering and Anti-Terrorism
The Bank also has an established Compliance and Anti-
Money Laundering and Anti-Terrorism departments 
and monitoring systems in place in compliance with 
requirements of Ghana’s Anti-Money Laundering Act 
2020 (Act 1044) and Anti-Terrorism Act 2008, Act 762. 
These include due diligence for opening new accounts, 
customer identification, monitoring of high-risk accounts, 
record keeping and training and sensitisation of staff on 
money laundering, which assist in reducing regulatory and 
reputational risks to the Bank’s business.
Internal control systems
The directors have overall responsibility for the company’s 
internal control systems and annually reviews their 
effectiveness, including a review of financial, operational, 
compliance and risk management controls. The 
implementation and maintenance of the risk management 
and internal control systems are the responsibility of the 
executive directors and other senior management.  The 
systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate the 
risk of failure to achieve business objectives and to provide reasonable, but not absolute assurance against material 
misstatement or loss.  The directors have reviewed the 
effectiveness of the internal control systems, including 
controls related to financial, operational and reputational 
risks identified by the company as at the reporting date 
and no significant failings or weaknesses were identified 
during the review.
Directors’ performance evaluation
In May 2021 and in compliance with Section 47 of the 
Bank of Ghana’s Corporate Governance Directives, the 
Board of Directors engaged the services of MRB Consult, 
led by a renowned Ghanaian Corporate Governance 
Practitioner, Mrs. Marian Barnor (“Consultant”) to carry 
out an externally facilitated formal evaluation of the Board 
of Directors for the period spanning January 1, 2019 to 
December 31, 2020.
The scope of the engagement entailed a comprehensive 
review of the Banks, corporate documents, minutes of 
the Board and its committees, policies in place and other 
documents considered as relevant as well as information 
derived from interactions with directors and a number of 
key management personnel.
The evaluation process was designed around the following 
four (4) areas:
• The Role
• The people
• The processes
• Behaviours
Proceeding around the four (4) thematic areas listed 
above, the evaluation tested how the Board defined and 
executed its role, whether or not the Board reserved any 
responsibility to itself, the right people were around the 
board table and the Board’s practices (agendas, meeting 
frequency, information and committees) added value or 
hindered its efficiency and capacity.  The evaluation also 
assessed whether or not  the Board worked constructively 
as a group and had sufficient transparency in its workings.
The process adopted by the Consultant involved evidence 
gathering including:20         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 20a. Review of relevant corporate documents 
b. Questionnaires administration - a detailed 
questionnaire and a self-rating assessment were sent 
to individual directors. These were aimed at assessing 
the effectiveness of the Board, its Committees, the 
Board Chair and the Company Secretary. 
c. There were also Interviews with directors and key 
members of senior management to probe any issues 
arising and to validate preliminary conclusions from 
the earlier stages of the review.
Other processes employed in the perforoance evaluation 
included the benchmarking of the Bank’s corporate 
governance structure against international best practices, 
the Corporate Governance Directive from the Bank of 
Ghana which provides guidelines for banks and deposit 
taking Institutions as well as the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 
992)
Other areas covered under the evaluation process included 
the context, roles and responsibilities of the board, the 
board structure, including appointments, composition of 
the board, assessment of the functioning of the board and 
the board’s role in governance.
The following were summary of key findings from the 
Board evaluation that required remedial actions;
• The Compliance and AML Units did not submit reports 
directly to the Board or its designated Sub-Committee;
• The Deputy Managing Director was not a substantive 
director as defined by the Companies Act.
• Matters specifically reserved for Board of Directors 
were not spelt out in the Board Charter;  
• The Chairpersons of the Audit and Credit and Risk 
Sub-Committees were not Independent directors as 
required by best practice; 
• The Credit and Risk Sub Committee handle two major 
subject matters which were merged. Best practice 
would dictate separation.
• There was no record of an in-house performance 
evaluation of the Board on AML/CFT issues and the 
Submission of a report to the Bank of Ghana
Subsequent to the evaluation, the Board has been taking 
steps to resolve the matters listed above.
A full copy of the Board Evaluation Report was submitted 
to the Bank of Ghana on October 15, 2021.
Professional development and training
On the appointment of new directors to the Board, 
the newly appointed directors were promptly given a 
comprehensive orientation on September 10, 2021. The 
orientation, facilitated by some of the continuing directors 
and selected Executive Management staff, covered areas such as the history of the Bank, strategy, the 2021 budget 
and performance update, regulatory and supervisory 
framework, directors duties and responsibilities, ethics 
and conflict of interest.
The inductees were provided with a full, formal and tailored 
induction programme to enable them to quickly adjust to 
the requirements of their new office.
The National Banking College offered annual corporate 
governance certification training to eight (8) of the directors.  
The topics covered under the corporate governance 
certification training were:
• ‘Operational Resilience for Corporate Boards in 
Financial Institutions’;
• ‘Insights into the Digital Financial Services Revolution 
- What Directors Should Know and Do’; and
• ‘Market Conduct and Discipline: Role of the Board’.
In addition to the above, the Board engaged the services 
of Messrs. KPMG to deliver a training to the Board of 
Directors on Risk Management. The topics covered were 
Risk Appetite, ICAAP, ILAAP, Stress Testing and IFRS 9.
The training ensured that newly appointed directors 
understood the requirements of their office and the 
business of the Bank. Continuing directors updated their 
knowledge and skills to fulfil effectively, their roles on the 
Board and Committees of the Board.
Conflicts of interest
The Bank has established appropriate conflicts 
authorisation procedures, whereby actual or potential 
conflicts are regularly reviewed and authorisations sought 
as appropriate.  The Bank also maintains an Interest 
Register pursuant to Section 196 of the Companies Act 
2019 (Act 992). During the year under review, one entry 
was made in the Interest Register.
Approval of the financial statements
The financial statements of Agricultural Development Bank 
Plc, as identified in the first paragraph, were approved by 
the Board of Directors on March 29, 2022 and signed on 
their behalf by:
BOARD CHAIRMAN                                                         MANAGING DIRECTOR
21         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 212120
KEY MANAGEMENT PERSONNELMANAGEMENT PROFILE
Dr. John Kofi Mensah 
Managing Director
Dr. John Kofi Mensah was appointed Managing Director on 1st August 2017. He is 
an astute Banker and Economist with over three decades of experience in different 
sectors of banking ranging from start-ups and delinquent bank operations, Credit and 
Foreign/Treasury management of Universal Banks. Since assuming the role of Managing 
Director of ADB, the Bank has witnessed a steady growth in its balance sheet from an 
initial negative balance to a now profit making bank and has also expanded its branch 
networks.He began his career at the erstwhile Bank for Housing and Construction in 
1989 as an Economics and Research Officer and later Treasury Officer until 1995 when 
he joined Securities Discount Company (SDC) as a Deputy Chief Money Market Dealer. 
In 1996, he joined International Commercial Bank (Now FBN Bank) as a pioneer and 
Manager of Treasury/Foreign Operations and was elevated to the position of General 
Manager/Deputy Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Bank.
He held several top management positions in other Banks including the defunct Unibank 
Ghana Limited and Capital Bank Ltd. He has served on several Boards including, the 
Ghana Technology University College (GTUC) and an Independent Non-Executive Director 
at Cocoa Processing Company (CPC). He is currently serving on the Enyan Denkyira 
Rural Bank, the Ghana International Bank (GHIB,UK) and the Ghana Education Trust 
Fund (GETFUND) Boards. He holds a Doctorate in Business Administration (Finance) 
from the SMC University of Zurich, Switzerland. He holds an MSc (Banking and Finance), 
Cum Laude from Finafrica in Milan, Italy and a BA (Economics & Statistics) from the 
University of Ghana-Legon. He obtained his Advanced Level Certificate at the St. Peters 
Secondary School, Nkwatia Kwahu, Eastern Region and his Ordinary Level Certificate at 
the Breman Asikuma Secondary School in the Central Region.
Dr. Kofi Mensah has also attended various capacity building programs, seminars and 
courses in Europe and Asia. He is also a fellow of the Institute of Professional Financial 
Managers (FIPFM), UK.
Alhassan Yakubu-Tali
Deputy Managing Director
Mr. Alhassan Yakubu-Tali was appointed Deputy Managing Director of the Agricultural 
Development Bank Limited (ADB) on August 15, 2017. 
He is a seasoned Investment Banker with 15 years of international experience spanning 
many multinational banks including, HSBC, Lehman Brothers Investment Bank, Bank of 
Tokyo and Fimat International Bank. He holds an MBA (Marketing) from the City University, 
Bellevue, USA (Frankfurt Campus); B.S. (Business Administration), also from the City 
University, Bellevue, USA (Frankfurt Campus); Diploma 2 (Business Administration) 
from West London College, London and Diploma 1 (Business Administration) from West 
London College, London. 
A married man, Alhassan is a polyglot and is fluent in German, English, Hausa and 
Dagbani. 
22         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 22
Leon Bannerman–Williams
Chief Finance Officer
Mr. Leon Bannerman–Williams was appointed Chief Finance Officer (CFO) of the 
Agricultural Development Bank (ADB) Limited on 5th February, 2019. Mr. Bannerman-
Williams is an experienced Chartered Accountant. He began his career at the Controller 
and Accountant General’s Department in1989 and joined the Agricultural Development 
Bank in 1997 as a Finance Officer. He served in several capacities including, Branch 
Operations Officer from September 1999 to October 2005, for Koforidua, Ring Road 
Central and Cedi House Branches respectively and was appointed the Branch Manager 
forthe Tema Main Branch in 2005. In 2007 he was transferred to the Head Office as the 
Financial Controller where he successfully led the team in the processes towards the 
Bank’s first adoption of the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). 
In 2010, Mr. Bannerman-Williams joined the Credit Risk Department as the Credit 
Portfolio Manager, a role that involved high level credit portfolio analytics for Executive 
Management and later was appointed as the Head of Monitoring and Recoveries 
Department in 2015. He is a qualified Chartered Accountant and holds Executive Master 
of Business Administration (Finance) degree from the University of Ghana Business 
School. Mr. Bannerman-Williams is a Fellow of the Association of Chartered Certified 
Accountants (UK) and also a Member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants (Ghana).
Edward Ian Armah-Mensah 
General Manager, Business Banking
Mr. Edward Ian Armah-Mensah joined ADB as Executive Head, Corporate Banking 
in 2010. He has also served as Chief Commercial Officer of the Bank, Group Head, 
Corporate Banking and is currently the General Manager, Business Banking. He has over 
24 years’ experience holding senior roles in the Ghanaian banking industry and over this 
period he has successfully led and set up Corporate Banking and Non-Bank structures 
from greenfields. 
He has an extensive experience in Corporate Finance with specialty in Deal Origination, 
Debt Restructuring, Trade Syndication, Trade/Cash Management and Asset Finance. 
He has deep and varied cross industry experience with Stanbic Bank (Ghana) Limited, 
Barclays Bank (Ghana) Limited and NDK Financial. Services Edward holds an Executive 
Master’s in Business Administration (Finance Option) and a Bachelor of Science in 
Business Administration both from the University of Ghana Business School. 
Kwame Asiedu Attrams
General Manager, Agribusiness
Kwame Asiedu Attrams assumed the role of General Manager for Agribusiness on 1st 
August 2019; he is a professional agriculturist with vast experience in the agricultural 
and financial sector. He has many years’ experience in the Banking sector having joined 
the Agricultural Development Bank in 2004 as a Credit Officer and later a Relationship 
Manager at the Agricultural Finance Department. As a Credit Officer in charge of Poultry 
and Livestock Projects he managed the Bank’s Broiler Outgrower program, also in his 
role as a Relationship Manager amongst several functions he was responsible for the 
efficient and effective management of Agricultural accounts. He was also responsible 
for the coordination, monitoring and evaluation of MIDA funded projects for the Bank. 
He represented the Bank on several Committees and Boards of Ministries, Departments 
and Agencies.
Mr. Attrams joined Access Bank Plc, Ghana in 2017 as the Head of Agro Allied Unit and 
helped set up the Agribusiness Unit of the Bank and also developed the agricultural 
finance strategy and products for the Bank. He has had other prior working experiences at 
Afariwaa Farms and Livestock Products Limited as Production Manager and Nutritionist; 
the Institute of Economic Affairs as a Legislative Research Assistant attached to the 
Parliament of Ghana and the University of Ghana as a Teaching Assistant in the Faculty 
23         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 23
of Agriculture. Mr. Attrams holds a first degree in Agriculture (Animal Science) and an 
MPhil in Animal Science (Nutrition) all from the University of Ghana and several other 
certificates from internationally recognized institutions such as the Kansas State 
University, USA and Galilee College, Israel. He is an old student of Prempeh College. A 
married man and devout Christian.
Enoch Benjamin Donkoh 
General Manager, Operations
Mr. Enoch Donkoh was appointed in April 2019. He has a career in banking spanning 
more than twenty years beginning at the Agricultural Development Bank (ADB) where he 
was with the Accounts and later Foreign Operations Departments. He joined the Bank 
of Ghana (BOG) Banking Supervision Division for seven years and gained experiences in 
Internal Control Practices, Risk Management and also best Banking Practices. 
With his experience at BOG he moved to work with acouple of Savings and Loans 
Companies namely Pro-credit Savings and Loans Company as Head of Finance, Express 
Savings and Loans Limited as General Manager/Managing Director, Global Access 
Savings and Loans as an Executive Head and later Executive Director. He also worked as 
the Head of Operations at the Micro Finance and Small Loans Centre (MASLOC). Enoch 
Benjamin Donkoh is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants, Ghana (1999), 
holds a Bachelor of Science in Administration (Accounting) from University of Ghana and 
an MBA (Finance) from Central University College. He is the acting heading director of 
Cyber and Information Secucrity.
Samuel Dako
Chief Audit Executive
Mr. Samuel Dako has has over 26 years’ managerial experience in the Banking Sector. 
He joined the Bank as a Finance Officer and has served in various capacities including 
Financial Controller, Head of Financial Reporting and Strategy, Manager Research and 
Corporate Planning and Branch Operations Manager. He also has relevant managerial 
experience in Branch Banking, Risk Management and Internal Audit & Assurance. Samuel 
is a Non-Executive Director of Akuapem Rural Bank. 
He also serves on the Audit Committee of a couple of Public Institutions.He is a Chartered 
Accountant and a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants Ghana, Merit 
Award. He holds MBA Finance from the University of Leicester UK, Bachelor-of-Laws 
Degree from GIMPA, BL (Cand.) and Post Graduate Diploma in Management Information 
Systems, GIMPA. He is a Certified ISO 27001 Lead Implementer and Auditor. 
Da-Costa Asiedu Owusu-Duodu
Chief Risk Officer
Mr. Da-Costa Asiedu Owusu-Duodu was appointed as Chief Risk Officer of the Bank 
on March 1, 2019. He has previously worked with the Bank in 1997 as a Credit Risk 
Officer in the Loans and Advances Department of the Bank and later joined Techno 
Serve Incorporated as a Microfinance Specialist, under the Trade and Investment Reform 
Programme executed in collaboration with theUnited States Agency for International 
Development (USAID). 
Mr. Owusu-Duodu has an in-depth knowledge and experience in the banking industry, 
in the areas of credit origination, project finance, syndication, debt restructuring and re-
organization of distressed companies, across Agricultural Development Bank, CAL Bank 
and Universal Merchant Bank. With over 22 years’ experience in banking and a proven 
track record of success in the maintenance of high asset quality, he brings a wealth of 
expertise to a well-established banking brand. 
24         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 24He holds a Master of Philosophy (MPhil) degree in Agri-Business Administration from 
the University of Ghana, Legon, and also a Bachelor’s Degree (B.Sc.) in Agricultural 
Economics from the same university.
Godwyll Ansah
Company Secretary, 
Mr. Godwyll Ansah was appointed the Company Secretary on 1st April, 2019. He 
is a seasoned legal practitioner with over 20 years’ experience in legal and banking 
practice ranging from Company and Commercial Law Practice Compliance, Anti-Money 
Laundering , Board Secretariat and Bad Debt Recovery. 
He worked at Bank of Africa Ghana Limited from December 2006 to March 2019 having 
held several positions including Head of Compliance, Head of Legal and Company 
Secretary. He also worked with Société General (Ghana) and Stanbic Bank Ghana 
Limited. Mr. Ansah holds a Master of Law (LLM) and Bachelor of Arts Degree (Law and 
Economics) both from the University of Ghana, Legon. He also attended the Ghana 
School of Law from 1999 to 2001 and was called to the Ghana Bar in October 2001. 
He is a member of the Ghana Bar Association.
Mrs. Amelia Croffie
Acting Head of Legal
Amelia Croffie (Mrs.) is the Acting Head of Legal of the Bank. She has about 29 years 
working experience in Corporate Law and Banking and engaged in legal advocacy. 
She holds a Bachelor of Arts Degree (Hons, Upper Division) in Law, Classical History 
& Civilization from the University of Ghana (1989) and a BL (Qualifying Certificate in 
Law) from the Ghana Law School (1991). She also holds an MBA (HR Option) from the 
University of Ghana (2003). She worked as a Teaching Assistant in Criminal Law and 
Police Administration at the Law Faculty of the University of Ghana (National Service) 
after her BL. She was the Legal Executive in Activity Venture Finance Company Limited 
(AVFCL), a government regulated venture capital finance company, which was set up 
among others to explore, pioneer and provide venture capital for businesses as a means 
of complementing the more traditional modes of lending in the financial sector.At AVFCL, 
she served in various roles including Board Secretary and was nominated as member of 
the Board of Directors on the then Midland Savings & Loans Limited as representative 
of AVFCL. She also served as a member of the Board of Directors for several years at 
Nyankumase Ahenkro Rural Bank in the Central Region of Ghana.
Jonas Kwabena Safo Baah
Head, Human Resources
Mr. Jonas Kwabena Safo Baah was appointed as the Head, Human Resources, on 1st 
July, 2019. He has considerable experience in Human Resources Management spanning 
over twenty (20) years’ experience in Ghana, fifteen (15) of which have been in the 
Banking industry. He has very good knowledge of the Human Resources functional areas 
especially, in the strategic areas of Performance,Talent and Succession Management. He 
has cross industry experience having worked with First Atlantic Bank Limited, Standard 
Chartered Bank (Ghana) Limited, Ecobank (Ghana) Limited and The Trust Bank (TTB) 
Limited. He also worked at The Capital Group Limited and GCAA. He holds a Master of 
Business Administration (Human Resources Management option) and Bachelor of Arts 
(Political Science) degrees from the University of Ghana, Legon and Bachelor of Laws 
(LLB) from GIMPA.
25         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 25
Bridget Kaminta Lekanong Nuotuo
Treasurer
Ms. Bridget Lekanong Nuotuo Kaminta joined ADB as Treasury Sales Manager in 2011 
and has been the Treasurer of the Bank since December March 2016. She has over 15 
years’ banking experience 13 years of which has been in treasury management. Bridget 
begun her banking career from Barclays Bank (Ghana) Limited where she was a Senior 
Dealer in charge of Retail and also held various positions in Retail Banking. 
Bridget holds an Executive Master’s in Business Administration (EMBA–Finance Option) 
from the University of Ghana Business School and a Bachelor of Commerce degree 
from the University of Cape Coast. She is also a Chartered Banker and a member of the 
International Financial Markets (ACI certified).
Prosper Morgan Dodor
Head, Internal Control
Mr. Prosper Morgan Dodor is a seasoned banker with over 25 years’ industry expertise in 
the area of Internal Control, Trade Finance, Cash Management, Operations, Internal Audit 
and Credit Assurance.He is currently the Head of the Internal Control and Due Diligence 
Department at the Agricultural Development Bank (ADB), ensuring that standardisation 
of processes and policies are in line with best practice. 
Prosper Morgan Dodor holds a Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.) Degree in Business 
Administration (Accounting option) and an MBA in Finance from the University of Ghana, 
Legon. He is a Member ofthe Institute of Chartered Accountants (ICA) (Ghana) and 
Chartered Institute of Bankers (CIB, Ghana).
Papa Arko Ayiah
Anti-Money Laundering Reporting Officer
Papa Arko Ayiah is the Anti-Money Laundering Reporting Officer of the Agricultural 
Development Bank Limited. He has 20 years of banking experience, all in the employ 
of our Bank. He joined ADB in 2000 as an Officer Trainee with the Treasury Department 
and was on various schedules including Money Market Dealing. He also worked in the 
Communications Unit of the Bank as a Senior Communications Officer . 
Papa is a Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialist and a member of the prestigious 
Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialists (ACAMS), USA.He holds a 
Master of Laws in Alternative Dispute Resolution from the Faculty of Law, University 
of Ghana, a Bachelor of Laws from the Faculty of Law, Mountcrest University College 
(affiliated with KNUST), a Master of Arts in Human Resource Management from University 
of Cape Coast, and a Bachelor of Educational Psychology also from University of Cape 
Coast.
26         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 262120
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is my honour to present to you my maiden statement to shareholders in my capacity 
as the Chairman of the Board of Directors.
Review of the Global and National Economy / COVID-19 Pandemic;
The political environment of Ghana, post the 2020 general elections, remained 
fairly stable. Vaccinations started within the first quarter of 2021 and the continuous 
observance of the protocols prescribed by the Ghana Health Service reduced the 
debilitating consequences of the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 and 
2021 presented an opportunity for recovery from the pandemic. However, serial 
waves and attendant surges in infections with its associated health and economic 
risks particularly those fuelled by the outbreak of the Delta variant, continued to 
weaken the global recovery momentum.
Growth prospects remained varied across different regional blocs and differed 
significantly between countries and across sectors, reflecting the different pace of 
vaccinations and removal of COVID-19 restrictions. While advanced economies had 
achieved 60 percent full vaccination of their populations by the end of 2021, only 4 
percent of the populations in low-income countries had been vaccinated. Ghana’s 
real GDP growth in 2021 was estimated at about 4.7%, an increase of about 4.3 
percentage points from the previous year’s 0.4% growth.  The sub-region as a whole 
however suffered significant decline in economic growth recording an average -0.6% 
in 2020 and a projected 3.6% growth in 2021. Average inflation for 2021 was 12.6%, 
an increase from the 9.9% recorded in 2020.
Performance of the Banking Industry 
The number of universal banks remained at twenty-three (23), consisting of fourteen 
(14) foreign-owned and nine (9) Ghanaian-owned banks.
The banking sector was largely able to weather the storm associated with the 
COVID-19 pandemic, surviving its second year, on the back of the regulatory reliefs 
granted by the Bank of Ghana in 2020, as well as the clean-up, recapitalisation 
and other regulatory reforms that preceded the onset of the pandemic. The sector 
therefore remained sound, solvent and profitable in 2021, evidenced by the strong 
balance sheet and income statement performances
The industry continues to record robust growth in total assets, investment and 
deposits. The industry’s financial soundness indicators remained healthy, with 
improved solvency, liquidity and profitability indicators as at the end of December 
2021.
An assessment of the banking sector as at end-year 2021 showed strong performance, 
underpinned by sustained growth in total assets. The industry’s asset size grew on the 
back of increased liquidity flows from deposits, shareholders’ funds and borrowings. 
Credit growth picked up but overall credit level and other indicators of financial 
intermediation remained below pre-pandemic levels due to the lingering effects of 
COVID-19 on the credit environment.
Total assets of the banking industry increased by 20.4 percent (year-on-year) to 
GH¢179.8 billion as at December 2021, higher than the 15.8 percent growth recorded 
in the same period of 2020 due to strong growth in investment. The asset growth Daasebre Akuamoah 
Agyapong II CHAIRMAN’S STATEMENTREPORTS27         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 27reflected the rebound in economic activities during the 
period under review.
The COVID-related regulatory reliefs and policy measures 
continued to support new lending activities.  Growth in 
gross loans and advances continued to pick up despite 
the pandemic-induced decline in credit demand and 
supply conditions. Gross loans and advances recorded a 
year-on-year increase of 12.6 percent to GH¢53.8 billion 
as at end-December 2021, higher than the 5.8 percent 
growth recorded in 2020. Growth in industry deposits was 
sustained with a year-on-year growth of 16.6 percent to 
GH¢121.1 billion as at end-December 2021.
Shareholders’ funds position remained strong, indicative 
of a strong capital base within the banking sector to 
withstand shocks. Although lower than the previous year, 
shareholders’ funds grew by 16.8 percent to GH¢24.8 
billion as at end-December 2021, compared to the 20.8 
percent growth in December 2020.
Overall, the banking industry recorded a strong balance 
sheet position in December 2021 .The lingering effect of 
the pandemic, however, continued to constrain a stronger 
credit growth and contributed to the continuous reallocation 
of liquidity flows into investments.
The banking sector’s exposure to credit risk was slightly 
elevated due to the lingering adverse impact of COVID-19 
on borrowers’ capacity to repay their loans. Consequently, 
the industry non-performing loans (NPL) ratio inched up 
from 14.8 percent in 2020 to 15.2 percent in 2021 on the 
back of impairment of some facilities by some banks during 
the period. The increase in the industry NPL ratio reflected 
mainly in the construction; agriculture, forestry and fishing; 
transport, storage and communication; and the commerce 
and finance sectors.
The industry’s solvency position remained strong, with a 
CAR of 19.6 percent as at end-year 2021, well above the 
revised regulatory minimum of 11.5 percent.
Profitability performance of the sector remained robust 
in 2021, recording a growth rate of 22.1 percent in 2021, 
relative to the 27.2 percent attained in the previous year, 
but profit after tax saw a relatively larger decline due to the 
financial sector recovery levy.
Performance of ADB
Esteemed shareholders, I am pleased to note that although 
the economy was yet to fully recover from the ravages of 
the pandemic, year on year, the Bank was more profitable, 
posting a profit after tax of GHS 81.6 million compared to 
GHS65.4 million in 2021. This represented 24.8% growth 
in performance in 2021, occasioning a Return on Equity 
and Return on Assets of 12.09% and 1.81 against 7.69% 
and 1.14% in that order respectively. The size of our 
balance sheet grew over the year from GHS5.7billion to 
GHS6.5 billion in 2021 representing 12.9% growth.
The Non-Performing Loan portfolio of the Bank witnessed 
a reduction from 34% in 2020 to 31%. Our target is to bring the NPL ratio within industry brackets by 2023. Deposits 
grew by 15% from GHS4.2billion in 2020 to GHS4.9 billion 
in 2021.
By the end of 2021, the capital adequacy ratio was 14.49%, 
above the regulatory minimum of 11.5%.The Bank also 
added two more branches to its network at University of 
Ghana,  Legon, Accra and Wisconsin University Campus, 
Hatso, Accra, thus, increasing its network size from the 
previous 82 to 84.
Board Changes
In September 2021 and after prior shareholders’ and 
regulatory approvals, the Board witnessed a reconstitution 
of its members. Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah, Hon. Habib 
Iddrisu and my good self asumed our duties as newly 
appointed directors of the Bank. Simultaneously, Messrs. 
Alex Bernasko and Mark Assibey-Yeboah retired from the 
Board. We thank the former directors for their meritorious 
services to the Bank and wish them all the best in their 
future endeavours.
The reconstituted Board continued with the implementation 
of the Strategic Plan of the Bank adopted for the period 
2020 to 2022 and the associated annual budgets. The 
Board will however review the strategy at the end of its 
implementation period and adopt a new or revised strategy 
starting from 2023.
Corporate Governance
To stay abreast with changing trends and emerging risks 
in the banking industry, directors underwent the annual 
corporate governance certification training offered by the 
National Banking College. Directors additionally received 
training in different aspects of risk management from 
KPMG. The Board also underwent an externally facilitated 
board performance assessment. Details of the training 
received by directors and the outcome of the externally 
facilitated board performance evaluation have been 
included under the disclosure portions of this report.
Corporate Social Responsibility
The Bank continued its enviable commitment in ensuring 
that the agricultural sector continues to play its critical role 
in the national economy. To this end, the Bank honoured 
its promise by paying the sum of GHS 600,000 to the 
2021 National Best Farmer as part its partnership with 
government to reward our gallant farmers and fishermen.
The Bank sponsored several health-related programmes 
by channeling funds towards the completion of hospitals 
to provide palliative care for the aged people. Other 
health related sponsorships included the purchase of two 
incubators to help hospitals in farming communities.Some 
support was advanced to compliment the First Lady’s 
efforts at generating interest in women’s football in Ghana.
The Bank supported the provision of tables and chairs 
to schools within some communities to enhance learning 
conditions within such areas.28         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 28Conclusion 
I use this opportunity to express our sincere gratitude to all 
our stakeholders, especially our shareholders, customers, 
employees, the Government of Ghana, the Ministry of 
Food and Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance, State-
Interest Governance Authority and the Central Bank.We are grateful for your support, loyalty and patience.  We 
remain confident of the prospects of the Bank and the fact 
that we are on the right track towards full recovery.  Thank 
you.29         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 292120
Dr. John Kofi 
MensahMANAGING DIRECTOR’S REPORTREPORTS
INTRODUCTION
Dear Shareholders, Your Bank has survived the turbulence in the global economy 
which has negatively impacted on the terrain that financial institutions operate.  
Another year has come and we are happy to see further positive strides in this great 
Bank’s growth.
REVIEW OF BUSINESS
1.0  FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 2021
From the fore, everyone would agree that financial sector performance was 
not expected to be as impressive as previous years presented.  However, the 
good news is that ADB Plc performed creditably as depicted in the table below; 
showing the trends of progress over the past four (4) years.
The following highlights our financial performance (profits declared before tax) 
over the past four years.
2018(GHS 
Million)2019(GHS 
Million)2020(GHS 
Million)2021(GHS 
Million)
PBT 34.06 17.88 97.70 126.10
The growth in profitability was significantly driven by improvement in interest 
income as a result of growth in loans and advances and the efficient management 
of costs in general, thereby impacting positively on Net Income, relative to the 
previous year.
Profit after tax for the year 2021 increased to over GHS 81.6million from 
GHS65.4million in 2020.
There was significant growth especially in investment securities as well as in 
loans and advances in the year under review, resulting in 13% growth of the 
Bank’s Total Asset to GHS6.50 billion.
Shareholders’ Funds – Growth Trend
2018 2019 2020 2021
GHS(Million)
639.71GHS(Million)
793.38GHS(Million)
850.62GHS(Million)
938.23
      
Shareholders’ Funds has seen a consistent growth over the last few years 
registeringGHS938.23 million in 2021.  This was 10.3% increase over the year 
2020. Going forward, Management will continue to strengthen its efforts in 
advancing key thematic areas in the broader strategy to drive growth, especially 
in retail deposit mobilisation.
2.0  OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE
The Bank continued to operate the 3-Year Strategic Plan (2019- 2022) which 
refocused on agricultural value chain businesses.
30         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 302.1   ELECTRONIC BUSINESS PLATFORM
In the year 2021, ADB made significant strides in 
the electronic business space, providing payment 
solutions that are safe and secure and providing 
convenience to its customers.
2.2   AGRIBUSINESS
2.2.1  Focus of Agricultural Value Chain 
Financing Mandate
The Bank deepened its financial intermediation in 
the agricultural sector in the year 2021 in line with its 
strategic objective to increase significantly the share 
of agricultural loans to the Bank’s total loan portfolio. 
A lot more focus was given to the provision of loans to 
meet working capital and capital expenditure needs of 
players in the Agricultural Value Chain not excepting 
animal and crop farmers, aggregators/stockist, agro-
processors, agro-marketers and input distributors.
2.2.2   Support for Aggregation, Grain Inventory 
and Foodstuff Marketing
To provide ready market for farmers financed by the 
Bank and those operating under the Planting for Food 
and Jobs Campaign, the Bank in 2021 approved an 
amount of GHS160.0 million as working capital to 
the National Food Buffer Stock Company Limited 
to procure the produce from farmers for supply to 
critical national institutions such as Senior Secondary 
Schools and for storage as food buffer.
2.2.3   Agro-based Support for 1D1F
The Bank in 2021 continued to be an active partner 
for the implementation of the One District One 
Factory Programme (1D1F). As at year-end 2021, the 
Bank had approved a total of GHS113.87 million in 
respect of eighteen (18) viable projects to undertake 
among others, broiler production and processing, 
fruit processing, general manufacturing, construction, 
jute bags production as well as fish farming and 
processing.
We are happy to announce that the Agricultural 
Development Bank Plc was adjudged the 1D1F 
Financial Service Provider of the Year at the Ghana 
Manufacturing Awards.
2.2.4   Import Substitution Financing
For the period under review, the Bank took the 
bold step to finance the rehabilitation and retooling 
of the defunct Kumasi Jute Factory to produce jute 
sacks to support cocoa, cashew, grain and other 
crop producers and aggregators/marketers. Once 
completed, the project is expected to have an 
enormous import substitution effect. A total amount 
of GHS26.0 million was approved for this worthy 
course. The Bank also continued its support for the 
local value chain production of imported commodities 
such as soya bean, rice and tomatoes.2.2.5   Support for the Poultry Sector
Without doubt, the year 2021 was a difficult one for 
our poultry farmers. A combination of outbreak of the 
avian influenza, hikes in the prices of feed and feed 
ingredients impacted negatively on the poultry sector. 
Nonetheless, the Bank stood with our cherished 
farmers, deferring due payments, restructuring 
existing facilities including the injection of additional 
funds to revive these businesses. We hope to see 
a better business outlook for the poultry sector in 
2022 as we continue to view the sector as one of our 
priorities.
2.3   ISO ADB INTEGRATED MANAGEMENT      
        SYSTEMS
Progressing on internationally accepted standards, 
the Bank pursued the implementation and adoption 
of additional management systems and standards to 
augment the ISMS (ISO 27001) certification.
In all, the Bank has obtained certification in the following 
management standards:
• Information Security Management System – ISMS 
(ISO 27001)
• Business Continuity Management System – BCMS 
(ISO 22301)
• Service Management System – SMS (ISO 20000) 
and 
• Quality Management System – QMS (ISO 9001)
For the card environment, the Bank attained a compliant 
status for the Payment Card Industry Data Security 
Standard (PCIDSS). Additionally, the Bank attained 
attestation in the following:
• Enterprise Risk Management – ERM (ISO 31000)
• Information Security Risk Management – ISRM 
      (ISO 27005)
• Cyber Security Management – (ISO 27032)
• Information Security Incident Management – ISIM 
(ISO 27035) and
• Auditing Management Systems (ISO 19011)
These certifications and attestations are proof that the 
Board and Management are committed to protecting 
the Banks assets against cyber-attacks, streamlining 
and improving upon internal operational processes and 
procedures, ensuring continuity of business operations 
and driving the digitization of most processes.
Management and the Board are committed to creating a 
robust banking environment, offering improved service 
quality, providing optimal comfort and convenience to our 31         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 31customers, while efficiently managing the risks that are 
embedded in the banking industry.
2.4 AWARDS
It is refreshing to note that under a very challenging year, 
the Bank achieved some laurels, prominent amongst them 
were:
• The cocoa sector as the best cocoa financing institution 
of the year under review, by the Ghana Cocoa awards.
• Best agribusiness financial institution of the year 
awarded by the Ghana Agribusiness Excellence and 
Leadership Awards.
The image of the Bank was highly projected on several 
other reputable platforms through some awards received 
within the year under review including; the SSI Agriculture 
& Agribusiness Support Leadership Award; One District, One Factory (1D1F) Financial Service Provider of the 
Year; among others.
CONCLUSION
Going forward, our challenge will be to endeavour to 
be worthy of the trust that society in general, and our 
shareholders in particular, have placed in us. Thank you 
for your continued support and we remain confident about 
the outlook for the ensuing years.
On behalf of the Board, Management and staff, we wish to 
thank our shareholders for their continued support.  To our 
customer we recognise their loyalty and we are committed 
to the growth of their business.  I acknowledge the hard 
work and commitment of staff towards the sustenance of 
the Bank’s growth.
We give thanks to the Almighty God.32         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 322120REPORT OF THE AUDITOR
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORTTO 
THE SHAREHOLDERS OF AGRICULTURAL 
DEVELOPMENT BANK PLC
Report on the audit of the financial statements
Opinion 
We have audited the financial statements of the Agricultural 
Development Bank Plc (the Bank) set out on pages 36 to 
100, which comprise the statement of financial position 
as at 31 December 2021, the statement of profit or loss, 
the statement of comprehensive income, the statement of 
changes in equity and the statement of cash flows for the 
year then ended, and notes to the financial statements, 
including a summary of significant accounting policies. 
In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in 
all material respects, the financial position of the Bank 
as at 31 December 2021, and its financial performance 
and cash flows for the year then ended in accordance 
with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) 
and also in the manner required by the provisions of the 
Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) as well as the Banks and 
Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 
930).
Basis for Opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International 
Standards on Auditing (ISAs). Our responsibilities under 
those standards are further described in the Auditors’  
Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements section of our report. We are independent of the company 
in accordance with the International Code of Ethics 
for Professional Accountants (including International 
Independence Standards) (IESBA Code) together with 
the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of 
financial statements in Ghana, and we have fulfilled our 
other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these 
requirements and the IESBA Code. We believe that 
the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and 
appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Key Audit Matters
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our 
professional judgement, were of most significance in our 
audit of the financial statements of the current period. 
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit 
of the financial statements as a whole, and in forming our 
opinion thereon, and we do not provide a separate opinion 
on these matters. For each matter below, our description 
of how our audit addressed the matter is provided in that 
context. 
We have fulfilled the responsibilities described in the 
Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the financial 
statements section of our report, including in relation 
to these matters. Accordingly, our audit included the 
performance of procedures designed to respond to our 
assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the 
financial statements. The result of our audit procedures, 
including the procedures performed to address the 
matters below, provide the basis for our audit opinion on 
the accompanying financial statements.INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT33         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 33We have obtained an understanding of the Bank’s 
IFRS 9 provisioning process as well as the credit 
risk modelling methodology.
We validated and tested the ECL model of 
the Bank by assessing the data inputs and 
assumptions driving the model calculations.We 
have also performed the following substantive 
audit procedures:
• Reviewed and tested the methodology developed 
to calculate loan loss provision under IFRS 9, 
concentrating on aspects such as factors for 
determining a ‘significant increase in credit risk’, 
staging of loans, testing specific models related 
to Probability of Default (PD), Loss Given Default 
(LGD), Exposure at Default (EAD). 
• Recalculated ECL estimates, 
• Reviewed forward looking information / multiple 
economic scenario elements.
• For stage 3 exposures, we tested the 
reasonableness of the assumptions underlying 
the impairment identification and quantification 
including forecasts of future cash flows, valuation 
of underlying collateral, estimated period of 
realisation for collaterals, etc.
• We have also reviewed information relating to the 
allowance for expected credit losses on loans and 
advances to customers disclosed in the notes to 
the financial statements of the Bank.IFRS 9 introduced a forward-looking Expected 
Credit Loss (ECL) model. The ECL model is to 
reflect the general pattern of deterioration or 
improvement in the credit quality of financial 
instruments. The amount of ECL’s recognized as a 
loss allowance or provision depends on the extent 
of credit deterioration since the initial recognition. 
The recognition of impairment could be done on 
a 12-month expected credit losses or Lifetime 
expected credit losses. Impairment computations 
under IFRS 9 therefore involves the use of models 
that take into account:
• The probability-weighted outcome.
• Reasonable and supportable information that is 
available without undue cost.
Significant judgements in the determination of the 
Bank’s Expected Credit Loss include:
• Use of assumptions in determining various ECL 
modelling parameters including probability of 
defaults and loss given defaults.
• Determination of a significant increase credit risk 
and 
• Determination of associations between 
macroeconomic scenarios.
The use of different models and assumptions 
can significantly affect the level of allowance for 
expected credit losses on loans and advances to 
customers. Due to the significance of such loans 
which account for about 35% of total assets of 
the bank, and the significant use of judgements, 
assessment of allowance for expected credit losses 
has been identified as a key audit matter.
A total amount of GH¢64m has been recorded in the 
statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive 
income for the year as a credit loss. The total 
impairments provision held as of 31 December 
2021 in accordance with IFRS 9 impairment rules 
were GH¢463m.
Further disclosures relating to these amounts and 
the Bank’s accounting policies regarding estimating 
these ECLs have been disclosed in Note 5.4 and 
Note 21 respectively of these financial statements.Key Audit MatterHow the matter was addressed in the audit
Allowance for expected credit losses on loans and advances to customers34         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 34Other Information
The Directors are responsible for the other information. 
The other information comprises the information 
included in the 116-page document titled “2021 Annual 
Report and Financial Statements”, which includes the 
Report of Directors, and Other Disclosures as required 
by the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and Specialised 
Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930). The other 
information does not include the financial statements and 
our Auditor’s report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover 
the other information and we do not express an audit 
opinion or any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements, 
our responsibility is to read the other information and, 
in doing so, consider whether the other information is 
materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our 
knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to 
be materially misstated.
If, based on the work we have performed, we conclude that 
there is a material misstatement of this other information, 
we are required to report that fact. We have nothing to 
report in this regard.
Responsibilities of the directors for the financial 
statements
The Directors are responsible for the preparation and fair 
presentation of the financial statements in accordance 
with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) 
and the requirements of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 
992) as well as the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking 
Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930), and for such internal 
control as the Directors determine is necessary to enable 
the preparation of financial statements that are free from 
material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements, the Directors are 
responsible for assessing the Bank’s ability to continue 
as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters 
related to going concern and using the going concern 
basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend 
to liquidate the Bank or to cease operations, or have no 
realistic alternative but to do so.
Those charged with governance are responsible for 
overseeing the Bank’s financial reporting processes.
Auditors’ responsibilities for the audit of the 
financial statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about 
whether the financial statements as a whole are free from 
material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and 
to issue an Auditor’s report that includes our opinion. 
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance 
with ISAs will always detect a material misstatement when 
it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and 
are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, 
they could reasonably be expected to influence the 
economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these 
financial statements.
As part of an audit in accordance with ISAs, we exercise 
professional judgement and maintain professional 
skepticism throughout the audit. We also:
• Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement 
of the financial statements, whether due to fraud 
or error, design and perform audit procedures 
responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence 
that is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis 
for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material 
misstatement resulting from fraud is higher than for 
one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, 
forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or 
the override of internal control. 
• Obtain an understanding of internal controls relevant 
to the audit in order to design audit procedures that 
are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the 
purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness 
of the Bank’s internal control.
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies 
used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates 
and related disclosures made by the Directors.
• Conclude on the appropriateness of the Directors’ use 
of the going concern basis of accounting and based 
on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material 
uncertainty exists related to events or conditions 
that may cast significant doubt on the Bank’s ability 
to continue as a going concern. If we conclude that 
a material uncertainty exists, we are required to 
draw attention in our Auditor’s report to the related 
disclosures in the financial statements or, if such 
disclosures are inadequate, to modify our opinion. 
Our conclusions are based on the audit evidence 
obtained up to the date of our Auditor’s report. 
However, future events or conditions may cause the 
Bank to cease to continue as a going concern.
• Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and 
content of the financial statements, including the 
disclosures, and whether the financial statements 
represent the underlying transactions and events in a 
manner that achieves fair presentation.
• Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding 
the financial information of the entities or business 
activities within the bank to express an opinion on 
the financial statements. We are responsible for the 
direction, supervision and performance of the Bank’s 
audit. We remain solely responsible for our audit 
opinion. 35         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 35We communicate with the Directors regarding, among 
other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit 
and significant audit findings, including any significant 
deficiencies in internal controls that we identify during our 
audit.
We also provide the Directors with a statement that 
we have complied with relevant ethical requirements 
regarding independence, and to communicate with them 
all relationships and other matters that may reasonably 
be thought to bear on our independence, and where 
applicable, related safeguards.
From the matters communicated with the Directors, we 
determine those matters that were of most significance in 
the audit of the financial statements of the current period 
and are therefore the key audit matters. We describe these 
matters in our Auditor’s report unless law or regulation 
precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, in 
extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a matter 
should not be communicated in our report because the 
adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be 
expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such 
communication.
Report on other legal requirements
The Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) requires that in 
carrying out our audit we consider and report on the 
following matters.  We confirm that:
• We have obtained all the information and explanations 
which to the best of our knowledge and belief were 
necessary for the purposes of our audit.
• In our opinion, proper books of account have 
been kept by the Bank, so far as appears from our 
examination of those books; 
• The statement of financial position, the statement of 
profit and loss and the statement of comprehensive 
income are in agreement with the books of account 
and returns.
• The statement of financial position, the statement of 
profit and loss and the statement of comprehensive 
income are in agreement with the books of account 
and returns.• In our opinion, to the best of our information and 
according to the explanations given to us, the 
accounts give the information required under the Act, 
in the manner so required and give a true and fair 
view of the state of affairs of the company at the end 
of the financial year and of the profit or loss for the 
financial year then ended.
• We are independent of the Bank pursuant to Section 
143 of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992).
The Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions 
Act, 2016 (Act 930) under Section 85(2) requires that we 
state certain matters in our audit report. Accordingly, we 
state that;
• The accounts give a true and fair view of the statement 
of affairs of the Bank and the results of operations for 
the year under review.
• We were able to obtain all the information and 
explanations required for the efficient performance of 
our duties.
• The transactions of the Bank are generally within the 
powers of the Bank;
• The Bank has generally complied with the provisions 
of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking 
Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) except as disclosed in 
note 22 of this financial statement
• The Bank has generally complied with the provisions 
of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2008 (Act 749), 
the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2008 (Act 762) and regulations 
made under these enactments.
The Engagement Partner on the audit resulting in this 
independent Auditors’ report is Emmanuel Adekahlor 
(ICAG/P/1596).
Ernst & Young (ICAG/F/2022/126)
Chartered Accountants
Accra, Ghana
Date: 31 March 2022
36         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 362120
STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS FOR 
THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2021
2021 2020
 Note GH¢’000 GH¢’000
 Interest income 7b 728,235 628,959
Interest expense 8 (247,909) (213,546)
Net interest income 480,326 415,413
Fees and commission income 9 101,319 87,585
Fees and commission expense 9 (10,116) (12,171)
Net fees and commission income 91,203 75,414
Net trading income 10 55,874 52,612 
Other operating income 11 12,412 10,533 
Operating Income 639,815 553,972
Impairment loss on financial assets 12 (41,781) (23,163)
Personnel expenses 13 (250,281) (233,468)
Other operating expenses 14 (154,710) (138,096)
Depreciation and amortization 15 (66,946) (61,556)
Profit before tax 126,097 97,689
Income tax expense 24 (44,495) (32,286)
Profit after tax 81,602 65,403
The notes on pages 36 to 101 form an integral part of these financial statements.37         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 372120
Note 2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Profit after tax 81,602 65,403
Other comprehensive income, net of tax of Items that will 
not be reclassified to profit or loss:
Fair value through Other Comprehensive Income 40(i) 6,030 (7,837)
Other comprehensive income for the year 6,030 (7,837)
Total comprehensive income for the year 87,632 57,566
Earnings per share
Basic earnings per share (in Ghana pesewas) 16                 23.5 18.85
Diluted earnings per share (in Ghana pesewas) 16                              23.5 18.85
The notes on pages 36 to 101 form an integral part of these financial statements.STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 202138         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 38
2120
STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION 
AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2021
2021 2020
Assets Note GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cash and bank balances 17 924,619 755,756
Due from other banks 18 346,219 309,098
Investment securities 20 2,400,655 2,222,139
Loans and advances to customers 21 2,282,312 1,911,988
Investment (other than securities) 22 99,926 91,892
Corporate tax assets 24 - 2,399
Other assets 26 52,253 61,742
Intangible assets 25 28,032 37,701
Property and equipment 27 113,735 95,800
Right of use assets 28 150,555 183,525
Deferred tax assets 24.4 55,813 43,754
Total Assets 6,454,119 5,715,794
Liabilities
Deposits from customers 31 4,927,216 4,281,037
Corporate tax liability 24.2 35,273              -   
Other liabilities 32 95,996 89,137
Borrowed funds 30 294,559 313,173
Lease Liability (IFRS 16) 33 162,820 181,824
5,515,864 4,865,171
Equity
Stated capital 34 698,700 698,700
Accumulated losses 35 (236,645) (252,236)
Revaluation reserve 36 57,531 57,531
Statutory reserve 37 182,015 141,214
Credit risk reserve 38 178,298 153,088
Fair value through OCI 39 58,356 52,326
Shareholders’ funds 938,255 850,623
Total liabilities and Shareholders’ Funds 6,454,119 5,715,794
The notes on pages 36 to 101 form an integral part of these financial statements
These financial statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 29 March 2022 and signed on its behalf by:
CHAIRMAN                                                                                                                                                     DIRECT OR39         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 392120
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR 
THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2021
In thousands of 
GH¢ Stated 
Capital Deposit 
for 
Shares Credit 
Risk 
ReserveStatutory 
reserveRevaluation 
Reserve Other 
ReservesRetained 
earningsTotal
Balance at 1 
January 2021698,700 -   153,088 141,214 57,531 52,325 (252,235) 850,623
Profit for the year -   -                -   -   -   -   81,602 81,602
Other Comprehensive Income net of tax
Net Change in fair 
value of Equity 
Investments-   -   -   -   6,030 -   6,030 
Transfer from 
retained earnings 
to statutory reserve -   -   -   40,801 -   -   (40,801) -
Transfer (from) 
credit risk reserve-   -   25,210 -   -   -   (25,210) -   
Balance at 31 
December 2021698,700 -   178,298 182,015 57,531 58,355 (236,644) 938,255
 40         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 402120
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR 
THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2021
In thousands 
of GH¢ Stated 
Capital Deposit 
for 
Shares Credit 
Risk 
ReserveStatutory 
ReserveRevaluation 
ReserveOther 
ReservesAccumulated 
lossesTotal
Balance at 1 
January 2020421,700 277,000 157,827 108,512 57,531 60,163 (289,349) 793,384
Additional Capital
Transfer from 
deposit for shares 
to stated capital277,000 (277,000) - - - - - -
Profit for the year - - - - - - 65,403 65,403
Cost of Stamped 
duty - - - - - - (326) (326)
Other Comprehensive Income net of tax
Net Change in fair 
value of Equity 
Investments- - - - - (7,838) -(7,838)
Transfer from 
retained earnings 
to statutory 
reserve - - - 32,702 - - (32,702) -
Transfer (from) 
credit risk reserve- -(4,739) - - - 4,739 -
Balance at 31 
December 20 20698,700 -153,088 141,214 57,531 52,325 (252,235) 850,62341         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 412120
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS FOR 
THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2021
Note 2021 2020
GH¢'000 GH¢'000 
Cash flows from operating activities
Profit before tax 126,097 97,689
Adjustment for non-cash items 48 (371,863) (330,880)
(Loss) before working capital changes (245,766) (233,191)
Changes in operating assets and liabilities 48.1 278,645 438,887 
Interest Income received 650,811 542,903 
Interest expense paid (240,656) (201,558)
Dividend Income -   186 
Taxes paid (NFSL) 24.2 -   (1,507)
Income Tax Paid 24.2 (20,893) (9,796)
Tax refund -    -    
Net cash generated from operating activities 422,139 535,924 
Cash flows from investing activities
Purchase of property and equipment (32,789) (12,725)
Purchase  of medium and long term government 
securities(10,067,284) (1,340,315)
Redemption of medium and long term government 
securities9,447,737 368,003
Proceeds from the sale of property and equipment 27 270 -   
Purchase of intangible assets 25 (2,764) (25,882)
Net cash used in investing activities (654,830) (1,010,945)
Cash flows from financing activities
Payments in borrowed funds (641,191) (137,256)
Receipts in borrowed funds 30 618,764 (34,660)
Payments of Principal portion of Lease liability (20,502) 169,947 
Payments of right of use assets (5,196)                        
(17,008)   
Net cash generated from financing activities (48,125) (18,977) 
Increase in cash and cash equivalents (280,816) (493,998) 
Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January 1,392,493 1,885,508 
Effect of exchange rate fluctuation on cash held -   983 
Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 29 1,111,677 1,392,493 
The notes on pages 44 to 103 form an integral part of these financial statements42         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 422120
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL
STATEMENTS 31 DECEMBER 2021
1. REPORTING ENTITY
Agricultural Development Bank Plc (ADB) is a financial 
institution incorporated in Ghana.  The registered office 
and address of the Bank is Accra Financial Centre, 3rd 
Ambassadorial Development Area. The Bank is primarily 
involved in corporate banking, investment banking and 
retail banking. These financial statements are for an 
individual entity.
2. BASIS OF ACCOUNTING AND CHANGES IN 
ACCOUNTING POLICIES
 a. Basis of preparation  
 
 The financial statements have been prepared on 
a historical cost basis  and equity instruments at 
fair value through  other comprehensive income 
(FVOCI) all of which have been measured at fair 
value. 
 These financial statements are presented in 
Ghana Cedi, which is the Bank’s functional 
currency. All amounts have been rounded to the 
nearest thousands including amounts disclosed  in 
the naratives, except when otherwise indicated.
 
 b. Statement of compliance
 The financial statements have been prepared in 
accordance with International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS) as issued by the International 
Accounting Standard Board (IASB) and in the 
manner required by the Companies Act 2019, (Act 
992), and the Banks and Specialised Deposit–
Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).
2.1. Changes in accounting policies and disclosures
Interest Rate Benchmark Reform (“IBOR reform”)
 Interest Rate Benchmark Reform Reform 
Phase 2 provides temporary reliefs to address 
the accounting issues which arise upon the 
replacement of an InterBank Offered Rate (an 
IBOR) with an alternative nearly risk-free interest 
rate (an RFR). For the purposes of these financial 
statements, the bank does not have any exposures 
to IBORs that are subject to reform and therefore 
the amendments had no impact.
2.2. New and amended standards and interpretations  
       issued but not yet effective
 The new and amended standards and 
interpretations that are issued, but not yet effective, 
up to the date of issuance of the Bank’s   financial 
statements are disclosed below. The Bank intends 
to adopt these standards, if applicable, when they 
become effective. Amendments to IAS 1: Classification of Liabilities 
as Current or Non-currentIn January 2020, the 
IASB issued amendments to paragraphs 69 
to 76 of IAS 1 to specify the requirements for 
classifying liabilities as current or non-current. The 
amendments clarify:
• What is meant by a right to defer settlement
• That a right to defer must exist at the end of the 
reporting period
• That classification is unaffected by the 
likelihood that an entity will exercise its deferral 
right
• That only if an embedded derivative in a 
convertible liability is itself an equity instrument 
would the terms of a liability not impact its 
classification
 The amendments are effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023 
and must be applied retrospectively. The Bank is 
currently assessing the impact the amendments 
will have on current practice and whether existing 
loan agreements may require renegotiation.
Reference to the Conceptual Framework – 
Amendments to IFRS 3
 In May 2020, the IASB issued Amendments to 
IFRS 3 Business Combinations - Reference to 
the Conceptual Framework. The amendments are 
intended to replace a reference to the Framework 
for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial 
Statements, issued in 1989, with a reference to 
the Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting 
issued in March 2018 without significantly changing 
its requirements.
 The Board also added an exception to the 
recognition principle of IFRS 3 to avoid the issue of 
potential ‘day 2’ gains or losses arising for liabilities 
and contingent liabilities that would be within the 
scope of IAS 37 or IFRIC 21 Levies, if incurred 
separately.
 At the same time, the Board decided to clarify 
existing guidance in IFRS 3 for contingent assets 
that would not be affected by replacing the 
reference to the Framework for the Preparation 
and Presentation of Financial Statements.
 The amendments are effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022 and 
apply prospectively.43         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 43Property, Plant and Equipment: Proceeds before 
Intended Use – Amendments to IAS 16
In May 2020, the IASB issued Property, Plant and 
Equipment - Proceeds before Intended Use, which 
prohibits entities deducting from the cost of an item 
of property, plant and equipment, any proceeds from 
selling items produced while bringing that asset to the 
location and condition necessary for it to be capable 
of operating in the manner intended by management. 
Instead, an entity recognises the proceeds from 
selling such items, and the costs of producing those 
items, in profit or loss.
The amendment is effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022 and 
must be applied retrospectively to items of property, 
plant and equipment made available for use on or 
after the beginning of the earliest period presented 
when the entity first applies the amendment.
The amendments are not expected to have a material 
impact on the Bank.
Onerous Contracts – Costs of Fulfilling a 
Contract – Amendments to IAS 37
In May 2020, the IASB issued amendments to IAS 
37 to specify which costs an entity needs to include 
when assessing whether a contract is onerous or 
loss-making.
The amendments apply a “directly related cost 
approach”. The costs that relate directly to a contract 
to provide goods or services include both incremental 
costs and an allocation of costs directly related 
to contract activities. General and administrative 
costs do not relate directly to a contract and are 
excluded unless they are explicitly chargeable to the 
counterparty under the contract.
The amendments are effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022. The 
Bank will apply these amendments to contracts for 
which it has not yet fulfilled all its obligations at the 
beginning of the annual reporting period in which it 
first applies the amendments.
IFRS 1 First-time Adoption of International 
Financial Reporting Standards  – Subsidiary as a 
first-time adopter
As part of its 2018-2020 annual improvements to IFRS 
standards process, the IASB issued an amendment to 
IFRS 1 First-time Adoption of International Financial 
Reporting Standards. The amendment permits a 
subsidiary that elects to apply paragraph D16(a) of 
IFRS 1 to measure cumulative translation differences 
using the amounts reported by the parent, based on the 
parent’s date of transition to IFRS. This amendment is 
also applied to an associate or joint venture that elects 
to apply paragraph D16(a) of IFRS 1.
The amendment is effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022 with 
earlier adoption permitted.IFRS 9 Financial Instruments – Fees in the ’10 per 
cent’ test for derecognition of financial liabilities
As part of its 2018-2020 annual improvements to 
IFRS standards process the IASB issued amendment 
to IFRS 9. The amendment clarifies the fees that an 
entity includes when assessing whether the terms of 
a new or modified financial liability are substantially 
different from the terms of the original financial liability. 
These fees include only those paid or received 
between the borrower and the lender, including fees 
paid or received by either the borrower or lender on 
the other’s behalf. An entity applies the amendment to 
financial liabilities that are modified or exchanged on 
or after the beginning of the annual reporting period in 
which the entity first applies the amendment.
The amendment is effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022 with 
earlier adoption permitted. The Bank will apply the 
amendments to financial liabilities that are modified 
or exchanged on or after the beginning of the annual 
reporting period in which the entity first applies the 
amendment.
The amendments are not expected to have a material 
impact on the Bank.
IAS 41 Agriculture – Taxation in fair value 
measurements
As part of its 2018-2020 annual improvements to 
IFRS standards process the IASB issued amendment 
to IAS 41 Agriculture. The amendment removes the 
requirement in paragraph 22 of IAS 41 that entities 
exclude cash flows for taxation when measuring the 
fair value of assets within the scope of IAS 41.
An entity applies the amendment prospectively to fair 
value measurements on or after the beginning of the 
first annual reporting period beginning on or after 1 
January 2022 with earlier adoption permitted.
The amendments are not expected to have a material 
impact on the Bank.
IFRS 17 – Insurance Contracts
In May 2017, the IASB issued IFRS 17 Insurance 
Contracts (IFRS 17), a comprehensive new 
accounting standard for insurance contracts covering 
recognition and measurement, presentation and 
disclosure. Once effective, IFRS 17 will replace IFRS 
4 Insurance Contracts (IFRS 4) that was issued 
in 2005. IFRS 17 applies to all types of insurance 
contracts (i.e., life, non-life, direct insurance and re-
insurance), regardless of the type of entities that issue 
them, as well as to certain guarantees and financial 
instruments with discretionary participation features. 
A few scope exceptions will apply. IFRS 17 introduces 
new accounting requirement for banking products with 
insurance features that may affect the determination 
of which instruments or which components thereof will 
be in the scope of IFRS 9 or IFRS 17.
Loan contracts that meet the definition of insurance 
but limit the compensation for insured events to the 
amount otherwise required to settle the policyholder’s 44         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 44obligation created by the contract: Issuers of such 
loans – e.g. a loan with waiver on death – have an 
option to apply IFRS 9 or IFRS 17. The election would 
be made at a portfolio level and would be irrevocable.
IFRS 17 is effective for reporting periods beginning 
on or after 1 January 2023, with comparative figures 
required. Early application is permitted, provided the 
entity also applies IFRS 9 and IFRS 15 on or before 
the date it first applies IFRS 17.
The Bank is currently in the process of assessing the 
impact of adopting IFRS 17 on its financial statements.
Definition of Accounting Estimates - 
Amendments to IAS 8
In February 2021, the IASB issued amendments 
to IAS 8, in which it introduces a definition of 
‘accounting estimates. The amendments clarify 
the distinction between changes in accounting 
estimates and changes in accounting policies and 
the correction of errors. Also, they clarify how entities 
use measurement techniques and inputs to develop 
accounting estimates.
The amendments are effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023 and 
apply to changes in accounting policies and changes 
in accounting estimates that occur on or after the 
start of that period. Earlier application is permitted as 
long as this fact is disclosed.The amendments are 
not expected to have a material impact on the Bank.
Disclosure of Accounting Policies - Amendments 
to IAS 1 and IFRS Practice Statement 2
In February 2021, the IASB issued amendments 
to IAS 1 and IFRS Practice Statement 2 Making 
Materiality Judgements, in which it provides guidance 
and examples to help entities apply materiality 
judgements to accounting policy disclosures. The 
amendments aim to help entities provide accounting 
policy disclosures that are more useful by replacing 
the requirement for entities to disclose their 
‘significant’ accounting policies with a requirement 
to disclose their ‘material’ accounting policies and 
adding guidance on how entities apply the concept 
of materiality in making decisions about accounting 
policy disclosures.
The amendments to IAS 1 are applicable for annual 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023 with 
earlier application permitted. Since the amendments 
to the Practice Statement 2 provide non-mandatory 
guidance on the application of the definition of 
material to accounting policy information, an effective 
date for these amendments is not necessary.
3.   SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING                              
      POLICIES
The Bank is currently assessing the impact of the 
amendments to determine the impact they will have 
on the Bank’s accounting policy disclosures.The following are the principal accounting policies 
adopted by the company in the preparation of these 
financial statements.
These accounting policies have been applied 
consistently in dealing with items that are considered 
to be material to the Company’s
The Bank has consistently applied the following 
accounting policies to all periods presented in these 
financial statements.
Set out below is an index of the significant accounting 
policies, the details of which are available on the 
pages that follow.
a. Foreign currency transaction
b. Interest income and expense
c. Fee and commission
d. Net trading income
e. Dividend income
f. Leases
g. Income tax
h. Financial assets and financial liabilities
i. Fair value measurement
j. Cash and cash equivalents
k. Investment securities
l. Property and equipment
m. Intangible assets 
n. Impairment of non-financial assets
o. Deposits and due to other banks
p. Provisions
q. Financial guarantees and loan commitments
r. Fiduciary activities
s. Employee benefits
t. Stated capital and reserves 
u. Earnings per share
v. Investment in associates
w. Operating segments
a. Foreign Currency Transaction
Transactions in foreign currencies are translated 
into the functional currency using exchange rates 
prevailing at the dates of the transactions.  Monetary 
assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies 
are re-translated at closing inter-bank mid rates ruling 
at the reporting date.  Non-monetary items that are 
measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign 
currency are translated at exchange rates ruling at 
the dates of initial recognition.  Non-monetary items 
denominated in a foreign currency that are measured 
at fair value are translated at exchange rates ruling at 
the date when fair value was determined.45         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 45Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from 
the settlement of foreign currency transactions and 
from re-translation at year-end exchange rates of 
foreign currency denominated monetary assets and 
liabilities are recognized in profit or loss, except for 
differences on translation of equity investments in 
respect of which an election has been made to present 
subsequent changes in fair value and differences 
arising on translation of equity investments in other 
comprehensive income.
All foreign exchange gains and losses recognized in 
profit or loss are presented net within the corresponding 
item. Foreign exchange gains and losses on other 
comprehensive income items are presented in other 
comprehensive income within the corresponding item.
These financial statements are presented in Ghana 
Cedi, which is the Bank’s functional currency. All 
amounts have been rounded to the nearest thousands, 
except when otherwise indicated.
b.   Interest income and expense
Interest income and expense for all interest-bearing 
financial instruments are recognised within ‘interest 
income’ and ‘interest expense’ in profit or loss using 
the effective interest method.
The effective interest method is a method of 
calculating the amortised cost of a financial asset 
or a financial liability and allocating interest income 
or interest expense over the relevant period.  The 
effective interest rate is the rate that exactly discounts 
estimated future cash payments or receipts through 
the expected life of the financial instrument or, when 
appropriate, a shorter period to the net carrying 
amount of the financial asset or financial liability.  
When calculating the effective interest rate, the Bank 
estimates cash flows considering all contractual terms 
of the financial instrument, including prepayment 
options, but does not consider future credit losses. 
The calculation includes all fees and points paid or 
received between parties to the contract that are an 
integral part of the effective interest rate, transaction 
costs and all other premiums or discounts.
c. Fees and Commissions
Fee and commission income and expense that are 
integral to the effective interest rate on afinancial 
asset or financial liability are included in the effective 
interest rate . Other fee and commission income 
– including account servicing fees, investment 
management fees, sales commission, placement fees 
and syndication fees – is recognised as the related 
services are performed. If a loan commitment is not 
expected to result in the draw-down of a loan, then 
the related loan commitment fee is recognised on 
a straight-line basis over the commitment period. A 
contract with a customer that results in a recognised 
financial instrument in the Bank’s financial statements 
may be partially in the scope of IFRS 9 and partially 
in the scope of IFRS 15. If this is the case, then the Bank first applies IFRS 9 to separate and measure the 
part of the contract that is in the scope of IFRS 9 and 
then applies IFRS 15 to the residual. Other fee and 
commission expenses relate mainly to transaction 
and service fees, which are expensed as the services 
are received.
d. Net Trading Income
Net trading income comprises gains less losses 
relating to trading assets and liabilities, including 
realised and unrealised fair value changes, interest 
and foreign exchange differences.
e. Dividend Income
Dividend income is recognized in profit or loss when 
the Bank’s right to payment income is established.
f. Leases
The Company assesses at contract inception whether 
a contract is, or contains, a lease. That is, if the 
contract conveys the right to control the use of an 
identified asset for a period of time in exchange for 
consideration.   
The Company applies a single recognition and 
measurement approach for all leases, except for 
short-term leases and leases of low-value assets. The 
company recognises lease liabilities to make lease 
payments and right-of-use assets representing the 
right to use the underlying assets.
Right-of-use assets 
The Company recognises right-of-use assets at the 
commencement date of the lease (i.e., the date the 
underlying asset is available for use). Right-of-use 
assets are measured at cost, less any accumulated 
depreciation and impairment losses, and adjusted 
for any remeasurement of lease liabilities. Low 
value assets and short-term leases are classified as 
operating leases and are not recognized in the Bank’s 
statement of financial position. These leases are 
recognised on a straight-line basis.
Lease liabilities
At the commencement date of the lease, the Company 
recognises lease liabilities measured at the present 
value of lease payments to be made over the lease 
term. The lease payments include fixed payments 
(less any lease incentives receivable), variable lease 
payments that depend on an index or a rate, and 
amounts expected to be paid under residual value 
guarantees. The lease payments also include the 
exercise price of a purchase option reasonably certain 
to be exercised by the Company and payments of 
penalties for terminating the lease if the lease term 
reflects exercising the option to terminate. Variable 
lease payments that do not depend on an index or 
a rate are recognised as expenses in the period in 
which the event or condition that triggers the payment 
occurs.
g. Income Tax
Income tax expense comprises current and deferred 
tax. Income tax expense is recognized in profit or loss 46         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 46except to the extent that it relates to items recognized 
in equity or OCI.
Current tax is the expected tax on tax payable on 
taxable income for the period, using tax rates enacted 
or substantively enacted at the reporting date.
Deferred tax is recognized in respect of temporary 
differences between the carrying amount of assets 
and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the 
amounts used for taxation purposes.  Deferred tax is 
not recognized for the following temporary differences: 
the initial recognition of goodwill, the initial recognition 
of assets and liabilities in a transaction that is not 
a business combination and that affects neither 
accounting nor taxable profit.
Deferred tax is measured at the tax rates that are 
expected to be applied to the temporary differences 
when reversed, based on laws that have been 
enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting 
date.  A deferred tax asset is recognized only to the 
extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will 
be available against which the asset can be utilized.  
Deferred tax assets are reviewed at each reporting 
date and are reduced to the extent that it is no longer 
probable that the related tax benefit will be realized.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset if there is a 
legally enforceable right to offset current tax liabilities 
and assets, and they relate to taxes levied by the 
same tax authority on the same taxable entity, or on 
different tax entities, but they intend to settle current 
tax liabilities and assets on a net basis or the tax 
assets and liabilities will be realised simultaneously.
h. Financial Assets and financial Liabilities
i. Recognition
The Bank initially recognises loans and advances, 
deposits, debt securities issued on the date on which 
they are originated. All other financial instruments 
(including regular-way purchases and sales of financial 
assets) are recognised on the trade date, which is 
the date on which the Bank becomes a party to the 
contractual provisions of the instrument. A financial 
asset or financial liability is measured initially at fair 
value plus, for an item not at FVTPL, transaction costs 
that are directly attributable to its acquisition or issue.
ii.    Classification
Financial assets 
The classification of financial instruments at initial 
recognition depends on their contractual terms and 
the business model for managing the instruments. 
Financial instruments are initially measured at their 
fair value, except in the case of financial assets and 
financial liabilities recorded at FVPL, transaction costs 
are added to, or subtracted from, this amount. Trade 
receivables are measured at the transaction price.
When the fair value of financial instruments at initial 
recognition differs from the transaction price, the Bank 
accounts for the Day 1 profit or loss.The Bank classifies all of its financial assets based on 
the business model for managing the assets and the 
asset’s contractual terms, measured at either:
• Amortised cost
• FVOCI
• FVTPL
Due from banks, Loans and advances to 
customers, Financial investments at amortised 
cost  
The Bank measures Due from banks, Loans 
and advances to customers and other financial 
investments at amortised cost only if both of the 
following conditions are met:  
• The financial asset is held within a business 
model with the objective to hold financial assets 
in order to collect contractual cash flows  
• The contractual terms of the financial asset 
give rise on specified dates to cash flows that 
are solely payments of principal and interest 
(SPPI) on the principal amount outstanding  
The details of these conditions are outlined below.
Business model assessment  
The Bank determines its business model at the level 
that best reflects how it manages groups of financial 
assets to achieve its business objective:   
• The risks that affect the performance of the 
business model (and the financial assets held 
within that business model) and, in particular, 
the way those risks are managed.  
• How managers of the business are 
compensated (for example, whether the 
compensation is based on   the fair value of 
the assets managed or on the contractual 
cash flows collected). 
The expected frequency, value and timing of sales are 
also important aspects of the Bank’s assessment. The 
business model assessment is based on reasonably 
expected scenarios without taking ‘worst case’ or 
‘stress case’ scenarios into account. If cash flows after 
initial recognition are realised in a way that is different 
from the  Bank’s original expectations, the Bank does 
not change the classification of the remaining financial 
assets held  in that business model, but incorporates 
such information when assessing newly originated or 
newly purchased financial assets going forward. 
The Solely Payments of Principal and interest test 
(SPPI)  
As a second step of its classification process the Bank 
assesses the contractual terms of the financial asset 
to identify whether they meet the SPPI test.
‘Principal’ for the purpose of this test is defined as the 
fair value of the financial asset at initial recognition 
and may change over the life of the financial asset 
(for example, if there are repayments of principal or 
amortization of the premium/discount).47         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 47The most significant elements of interest within a 
lending arrangement are typically the consideration 
for the time value of money and credit risk. To make 
the SPPI assessment, the Bank applies judgement 
and considers relevant factors such as the currency 
in which the financial asset is denominated, and the 
period for which the interest rate is set. 
In contrast, contractual terms that introduce a more 
than the minimum exposure to risks or volatility in the 
contractual cash flows that are unrelated to a basic 
lending arrangement do not give rise to contractual 
cash flows that are solely payments of principal and 
interest on the amount outstanding. In such cases, the 
financial asset is required to be measured at FVPL. 
Financial assets that are held for trading or managed 
and whose performance is evaluated on a fair value 
basis are measured at FVTPL because they are 
neither held to collect contractual cash flows nor 
held both to collect contractual cash flows and to sell 
financial assets. 
On initial recognition of an equity investment that is 
not held for trading, the Bank may irrevocably elect 
to present subsequent changes in fair value in OCI. 
This election is made on an investment-by-investment 
basis. All other financial assets are classified as 
measured at FVTPL. In addition, on initial recognition, 
the Bank may irrevocably designate a financial asset 
that otherwise meets the requirements to be measured 
at amortised cost or at FVOCI as at FVTPL if doing 
so eliminates or significantly reduces an accounting 
mismatch that would otherwise arise.
i. Fair Value Measurement
‘Fair value’ is the price that would be received to 
sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an 
orderly transaction between market participants 
at the measurement date in the principal or, in its 
absence, the most advantageous market to which 
the Bank has access at that date. The fair value of 
a liability reflects its non-performance risk. When 
one is available, the Bank measures the fair value 
of an instrument using the quoted price in an active 
market for that instrument. A market is regarded as 
‘active’ if transactions for the asset or liability take 
place with sufficient frequency and volume to provide 
pricing information on an ongoing basis. If there is 
no quoted price in an active market, then the Bank 
uses valuation techniques that maximise the use of 
relevant observable inputs and minimise the use of 
unobservable inputs. The chosen valuation technique 
incorporates all of the factors that market participants 
would take into account in pricing a transaction. The 
best evidence of the fair value of a financial instrument 
on initial recognition is normally the transaction price 
– i.e. the fair value of the consideration given or 
received. If the Bank determines that the fair value 
on initial recognition differs from the transaction price 
and the fair value is evidenced neither by a quoted 
price in an active market for an identical asset or 
liability nor based on a valuation technique for which any unobservable inputs are judged to be insignificant 
in relation to the measurement, then     the financial 
instrument is initially measured at fair value, adjusted 
to defer the difference between the fair value on initial 
recognition and the transaction price. Subsequently, 
that difference is recognised in profit or loss on an 
appropriate basis over the life of the instrument but 
no later than when the valuation is wholly supported 
by observable market data or the transaction is closed 
out. If an asset or a liability measured at fair value has 
a bid price and an ask price, then the Bank measures 
assets and long positions at a bid price and liabilities 
and short positions at an ask price.
j.   Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents include notes and coins 
on hand, unrestricted balances held with central 
banks and highly liquid financial assets with original 
maturities of three months or less from the date of 
acquisition that are subject to an insignificant risk of 
changes in their fair value, and are used by the Bank 
in the management of its short-term commitments. 
Cash and cash equivalents are carried at amortised 
cost in the statement of financial position.
For the purposes of the statement of cash flows, cash 
equivalents include short term liquid investments 
which are readily convertible into known amounts of 
cash and which were within three months of maturity 
when acquired.
k. Investment Securities
The ‘investment securities’ caption in the statement 
of financial position includes: equity investment 
securities designated as at FVOCI.
When equity instruments are measured at FVOCI, 
gains and losses on such equity instruments are 
never reclassified to profit or loss and no impairment is 
recognised in profit or loss. Dividends are recognised 
in profit or loss unless they clearly represent a recovery 
of part of the cost of the investment, in which case 
they are recognised in OCI. Cumulative gains and 
losses recognised in OCI are transferred to retained 
earnings on disposal of an investment.
l.  Property, Plant and Equipment 
i.    Recognition and measurement
Items of property, plant and equipment are measured 
at cost less accumulated depreciation and any 
accumulated impairment losses or as professionally 
revalued from time to time less accumulated 
depreciation. Cost includes expenditure that are 
directly attributable to the acquisition of the asset. The 
cost of self -constructed assets includes the cost of 
materials and direct labour, any other costs directly 
attributable to bringing the assets to a working condition 
for their intended use, the costs of dismantling and 
removing the items and restoring the site on which 
they are located, and capitalised borrowing costs.
Land and building are measured at fair value. Changes 
in fair value are recorded in OCI and credited to the 48         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 48asset revaluation surplus in equity. However, to the 
extent that it reverses a revaluation deficit of the 
same asset previously recognised in profit or loss, the 
increase is recognised in profit and loss. A revaluation 
deficit is recognised in the statement of profit or loss, 
except to the extent that it offsets an existing surplus 
on the same asset recognised in the asset revaluation 
surplus. Revaluation are performed on a regular basis. 
Accumulated depreciation as at the revaluation date 
is eliminated against the gross carrying amount of the 
asset and the net amount is restated to the revalued 
amount of the asset. Upon disposal, any revaluation 
surplus relating to the particular asset being sold is 
transferred to retained earnings
Purchased intangible assets that is integral to the 
functionality of the related equipment is capitalised as 
part of that equipment.
Increases in the carrying amount arising on revaluation 
are credited to a revaluation surplus.  Decreases 
that offset previous increases of the same asset are 
charged against the revaluation surplus.  All other 
decreases are charged to profit or loss.
When parts of an item of property or equipment 
have different useful lives, they are accounted for as 
separate items (major components) of property and 
equipment.
Capital Work in Progress is carried at cost less 
accumulated impairment.
The gain or loss on disposal of an item of property, 
plant and equipment is determined by comparing 
the proceeds from disposal with the carrying amount 
of the item of property, plant and equipment and is 
recognised in other income/other expenses in profit 
or loss.
ii. Subsequent costs
The cost of replacing part of an item of property or 
equipment is recognised in the carrying amount of the 
item if it is probable that the future economic benefits 
embodied within the part will flow to the Bank and its 
cost can be measured reliably. The costs of the day-
to-day servicing of property, plant and equipment are 
recognised in profit or loss as incurred.
iii. Depreciation
Depreciation is calculated over the depreciable 
amount, which is the cost of the asset, or other 
amount substituted for cost, less its residual value.  
Depreciation is recognised in profit or loss on a straight-
line basis over its expected useful lives of each part 
of an item or property and equipment, since this most 
closely reflects the expected pattern consumption of 
the future economic benefits embodied in the asset.  
Land is not depreciated
The estimated useful lives for the current and 
comparative periods are as follows:
Buildings                    20 year
Motor vehicles                   4 yearsFurniture and equipment     5 years
Computers                    5 years
Leasehold Improvement      lower of the estimated               
                    useful life and the lease  
                                            tenor
Depreciation methods, useful lives and residual values 
are reassessed at each reporting date and adjusted if 
appropriate.
m. Intangible Assets
Computer intangible
Intangible assets comprise computer intangible.  
Intangible acquired by the Bank is measured at cost 
less accumulated amortization and any accumulated 
impairment losses.
Subsequent expenditure on intangible is capitalized 
only when it increases future economic benefits 
embodied in the specific asset to which it relates.  All 
other expenditure is expensed as incurred.
intangible is amortized on a straight-line basis and 
recognized in profit or loss over its estimated useful 
life, from the date that it is available for use.  The 
estimated useful life of intangible for the current and 
comparative periods is five years. 
Amortization methods, useful lives and residual values 
are reviewed at each reporting date and adjusted, if 
appropriate.
n. Impairment of Non-financial Assets
The carrying amounts of the Bank’s non-financial 
assets other than corporate tax assets and deferred 
tax assets, are reviewed at each reporting date 
to determine whether there is any indication of 
impairment.  If any such indication exists, then 
the asset’s recoverable amount is estimated.  An 
impairment loss is recognised if the carrying amount 
of an asset or its cash-generating unit exceeds its 
recoverable amount.  A cash-generating unit is the 
smallest identifiable asset that generates cash flows 
that are largely independent from other assets.  
Impairment losses are recognised in profit or loss. 
Impairment losses recognised in respect of cash 
generating units are allocated first to reduce the 
carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the units 
and then to reduce the carrying amount of the other 
assets in the unit (group of units) on a pro rata basis.
The recoverable amount of an asset or cash-
generating unit is the greater of its value in use and 
its fair value less costs to sell.  In assessing value in 
use, the estimated future cash flows are discounted to 
their present value using a pre-tax discount rate that 
reflects current market assessments of the time value 
of money and the risks specific to the asset.
In respect of other assets, impairment losses 
recognised in prior periods are assessed at each 
reporting date for any indications that the loss has 
decreased or no longer exists.  An impairment loss is 
reversed if there has been a change in the estimates 49         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 49used to determine the recoverable amount.  An 
impairment loss is reversed only to the extent that the 
asset’s carrying amount does not exceed the carrying 
amount that would have been determined, net of 
depreciation or amortisation, if no impairment loss 
had been recognized
o. Deposits and Borrowed Funds
Deposits and borrowings from other banks are the 
Bank’s sources of debt funding. The Bank classifies 
capital instruments as financial liabilities or equity 
instruments in accordance with the substance of the 
contractual terms of the instrument.
Deposits and borrowings from other banks are initially 
measured at fair value plus transaction costs, and 
subsequently measured at their amortised cost using 
the effective interest method, except where the Bank 
chooses to carry the liabilities at fair value through 
profit or loss.
p. Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Bank has a 
present legal or constructive obligation as a result of 
past events that can be reliably estimated and it is 
probable that an outflow of resources will be required 
to settle the obligation.  Restructuring provisions 
comprise lease termination penalties and employee 
termination payments.  Provisions are not recognised 
for future operating losses.
Where there are a number of similar obligations which 
are likely to result in an outflow to settle related classes 
of obligations as a whole, a provision is recognised 
even if the likelihood of an outflow with respect to any 
one item included in the same class of obligations 
may be small.
Provisions are measured at the present value of 
expenditures expected to be required to settle 
obligations using pre-tax rates that reflect current 
market assessments of the time value of money and 
risks specific to the obligation.  An increase in the 
provision due to passage of time is recognised as an 
interest expense.
q. Financial Guarantee and Loan Commitments
Financial guarantees are initially recognised in the 
financial statements (within Other Liabilities) at fair 
value, being the premium received. Subsequent to initial 
recognition, the Bank’s liability under each guarantee 
is measured at the higher of the amount initially 
recognised less cumulative amortisation recognised 
in the income statement, and an ECL allowance as set 
out in Note 41.1. 
The premium received is recognised in the income 
statement in Net fees and commission income on a 
straight-line basis over the life of the guarantee. 
Undrawn loan commitments and letters of credits are 
commitments under which, over the duration of the 
commitment, the Bank is required to provide a loan 
with pre-specified terms to the customer. Similar to 
financial guarantee contracts, these contracts are in 
the scope of the ECL requirements.The nominal contractual value of financial guarantees, 
letters of credit and undrawn loan commitments, where 
the loan agreed to be provided is on market terms, are 
not recorded on in the statement of financial position.  
The nominal values of these instruments together with 
the corresponding ECL are disclosed in Note 41.1. 
r. Fiduciary Activities
The Bank acts as trustees and in other fiduciary 
capacities that result in the holding or placing of 
assets on behalf of individuals, trusts, retirement 
benefit plans and other institutions.  These assets 
and income arising thereon are excluded from these 
financial statements, as they are not assets of the 
Bank.
s.  Employee Benefits
Retirement benefit cost
The Bank contributes to the statutory Social Security 
& National Insurance Trust (SSNIT).  This is a defined 
contribution scheme registered under the National 
Social Security Act.  The Bank’s obligations under the 
scheme are limited to specific contributions legislated 
from time to time and are currently limited to a 
maximum of 13% of an employee’s basic salary per 
month.  The Bank also operates a defined contribution 
benefit scheme for its employees. 
The assets of this scheme are held by the treasury 
department of the Bank.  The scheme is funded by 
contributions from both the employees and employer.  
Benefits are paid to retiring staff in accordance with 
the scheme rules.  The Bank’s obligations to staff 
retirement benefit schemes are charged to the profit 
or loss in the year to which they relate..
 Provision for employee entitlement
Employee entitlements to annual leave are recognised 
when they accrue to employees.  A provision is made 
for the estimated liability for annual leave accrued at 
the year end. 
 Short-term Employment benefits
Short-term employee benefit obligations are measured 
on an undiscounted basis and are expensed as the 
related service is provided.  A provision is recognized 
for the amount expected to be paid under short-term 
cash bonus or profit-sharing plans, if the bank has 
a present legal or constructive obligation to pay this 
amount as a result of past service provided by the 
employee and the obligation can be estimated reliably.
 Long service awards
The bank has other long-term employee benefits 
scheme in the form a long service award for its 
employees.  These are long service awards which 
accrue to employees based on graduated periods 
of uninterrupted service.  These awards accrue 
over the service life of employees.  Employees 
leaving the service of the bank after 5 years through 
retirement (both voluntary and compulsory) or 
resignation become eligible for these awards based 
on their current entitlement at the time of retirement or 
resignation based on their length of service. The bank 
has no further obligation after the staff exits the bank. 
The benefits are unfunded.50         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 50t.   Stated Capital and Reserves
 i.   Share capital
The Bank classifies capital and equity instruments 
in accordance with the contractual terms of the 
instrument.  The Bank’s share capital is not redeemable 
by holders in the normal course of business and bears 
an entitlement to distributions that is non-cumulative 
and at the discretion of the Directors.  Accordingly, 
they are presented as a component of issued capital 
within equity.
ii.   Share issue costs
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of 
an equity instrument are deducted from equity.
iii.   Dividend on equity shares
Dividends on equity shares are recognized in the 
period in which they are approved by the shareholders.  
Dividend proposed which is yet to be approved by 
shareholders, is disclosed by way of notes. 
iv.   Statutory reserves
Statutory reserves are based on the requirements of 
section 34(i) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit–
Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).  Transfers into 
statutory reserves are made in accordance with the 
relationship between the Bank’s reserve fund and its 
paid-up capital, which determines the proportion of 
profits for the period that should be transferred.
v.   Credit risk reserves
This is a reserve created to set aside the excess or 
shortfalls between amounts recognized as impairment 
loss on loans and advances based on provisions made 
for bad and doubtful loans and advances calculated 
in accordance with IFRS and the Central Bank’s 
prudential guidelines.
u. Earnings per share
The Bank presents basic earnings per share (EPS) 
data for its equityy shares. Basic EPS is calculated 
by dividing the profit or loss attributable to equity 
shareholders of the Bank by the weighted average 
number of equity shares outstanding during the year.
v. Investment in Associates 
      (equity – accounted investees)
Associates are those entities in which the Bank has 
significant influence but not control or joint control, 
over the financial and operating policies. Interests in 
associates are accounted for using the equity method.
They are recognized initially at cost, which includes 
transaction costs. Subsequent to initial recognition, 
the financial statements include the Bank’s share 
of the profit or loss and OCI of equity-accounted 
investees, until the date on which significant influence 
ceases.
w. Operating Segments
A segment is a distinguishable component of the 
Bank that is engaged either in providing products or 
services (business segment), or in providing products or services within a particular economic environment 
(geographical segment), which is subject to risks 
and rewards that are different from those of other 
segments.
The Bank’s primary format for segment reporting is 
based on business segments. 
The Bank has the following main business segments:
• Corporate Banking: includes loans, deposits and 
other transactions and balances with corporate 
customers including the Agricultural sector.
• Retail Banking: includes loans, deposits and other 
transactions and balances with retail customers..
• Central Treasury: undertakes the Bank’s funding 
and centralised risk management activities 
through borrowings, issues of debt securities, 
use of derivatives for risk management purposes 
and investing in liquid assets such as short-term 
placements and corporate and government debt 
securities.
4.   SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS,  
      ESTIMATES AND ASSUMPTIONS
The preparation of the Bank’s financial statements 
requires management to make judgements, estimates 
and assumptions that affect the reported amount of 
revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities,and the 
accompanying disclosures, as well as the disclosure 
of contingent liabilities. Uncertainty about these 
assumptions and estimates could result in outcomes 
that require a material adjustment to the carrying 
amount of assets or liabilities affected in future periods. 
In the process of applying the Bank’s accounting 
policies, management has made the following 
judgements and assumptions concerning the future 
and other key sources of estimation uncertainty at the 
reporting date, that have a significant risk of causing 
a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of 
assets and liabilities within the next financial year. 
Existing circumstances and assumptions about future 
developments may change due to circumstances 
beyond the Bank’s control and are reflected in the 
assumptions if and when they occur. Items with the 
most significant effect on the amounts recognised in 
the financial statements with substantial management 
judgement and/or estimates are collated below with 
respect to judgements/estimates involved.
4.1. Impairment losses on financial assets
The measurement of impairment losses both under 
IFRS 9 across all categories of financial assets 
requires judgement, in particular, the estimation of the 
amount and timing of future cash flows and collateral 
values when determining impairment losses and the 
assessment of a significant increase in credit risk. 
These estimates are driven by a number of factors, 
changes in which can result in different levels of 
allowances.
The Bank’s ECL calculations are outputs of complex 
models with a number of underlying assumptions 
regarding the choice of variable inputs and their 51         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 51interdependencies. Elements of the ECL models that 
are considered accounting judgements and estimates 
include:
• The Bank’s internal credit grading model, which 
assigns PDs to the individual grades
• The Bank’s criteria for assessing if there has 
been a significant increase in credit risk and 
so allowances for financial assets should be 
measured on a LTECL basis and the qualitative 
assessment
• The segmentation of financial assets when their 
ECL is assessed on a collective basis
• Development of ECL models, including the 
various formulas and the choice of inputs
• Determination of associations between 
macroeconomic scenarios and, economic inputs, 
such as unemployment levels and collateral 
values, and the effect on PDs, EADs and LGDs
• Selection of forward-looking macroeconomic 
scenarios and their probability weightings, to 
derive the economic inputs into the ECL models.
5.   FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
5.1  Introduction and overview
The Bank’s activities expose it to a variety of financial 
risks and those activities involve the analysis, 
evaluation, acceptance and management of some 
degree of risk or combination of risks. Taking risk is 
core to the Bank’s business, and the operational risks 
are an inevitable consequence of being in business. 
The Bank’s aim is therefore to achieve an appropriate 
balance between risk and return and minimize 
potential adverse effects on its financial performance. 
The most important types of risk include:
• Operational risk
• Credit risk
• Liquidity risk
• Market risk - includes currency, interest rate and 
other price risk
5.2  Risk management framework
The Board of Directors has overall responsibility 
for the establishment and oversight of the Bank’s 
risk management framework. The board has 
established Board Audit and Risk Committees and 
a risk department to assist in the discharge of this 
responsibility. The board has also established the 
Credit Committee which is responsible for developing 
and monitoring risk management in their respective 
areas.
The Bank’s risk management policies are established 
to identify and analyse the risks faced by the Bank, to 
set appropriate risk limits and controls, and to monitor 
risks and adherence to limits. Risk management 
policies and systems are reviewed regularly to reflect 
changes in market conditions, products and services 
offered.The Bank, through its training and management 
standards and procedures, aims to develop a 
disciplined and constructive control environment, 
in which all employees understand their roles and 
obligations.
The Bank’s Audit and Risk Management Committees 
are responsible for monitoring compliance with the 
Bank’s risk management policies and procedures, and 
for reviewing the adequacy of the risk management 
framework in relation to the risks faced by the Bank.  
The Audit and Risk Management Committees are 
assisted in these functions by Internal Audit and 
the Risk Management departments.  Internal Audit 
undertakes both regular and ad-hoc reviews of risk 
management controls and procedures, the results of 
which are reported to the Board Audit Committee.
The Bank has a Risk Management department 
organised into credit control, recoveries and 
operational control.  Under the credit control 
department, it has credit administration, credit risk 
appraisal and credit monitoring.  The department is 
responsible for managing all risks to which the Bank 
is exposed (operational risk, credit risk, liquidity risk, 
interest rate risk and foreign currency risk.)  The 
risk management department is developing a risk 
management framework for the Bank.
The Bank treats all branches as independent 
business units which generate their own income, run 
their ownprofit or loss statement and statement of 
financial position.  The head office consolidates these 
andexercises oversight responsibility over all the 
branches.  Credit is generated at the branch level and 
is then channeled through the credit control unit of 
the risk management department where a credit risk 
appraisal is performed to assess whether to engage 
the client or not.
The client’s file is then moved to the head of risk 
management and to the other appropriate levels 
(credit committee, board and so on) for final approval 
before credit is granted.  There is also the monitoring 
aspect where the head office credit monitoring team 
monitors the loans and their performance in addition 
to the monitoring performed at the branch level.  
Where a loan goes beyond current, it is classified 
as either OLEM, substandard, doubtful or loss, as 
recommended by the Central Bank of Ghana.  Where 
a loan goes beyond current, there is the recoveries 
team which moves in to recover loan losses. 
Overall authority for market risk is vested in the ALCO. 
The Risk Management unit is responsible for the 
development of detailed risk management policies 
(subject to review and approval by ALCO) and for the 
day-to-day review of their implementation.
Exposure to other market risks – Non-trading 
portfolios.
The principal risk to which non-trading portfolios are 
exposed is the risk of loss from fluctuations in the 52         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 52future cash flows or fair values of financial instruments 
because of a change in market interest rates. Interest 
rate risk is managed principally through monitoring 
interest rate gaps and by having pre-approved limits 
for repricing bands. ALCO is the monitoring body for 
compliance with these limits and is assisted by Central 
Treasury in its day-to-day monitoring activities.
In the last three years, the Bank has taken steps to 
provide the necessary safeguards to ensure that 
market risk is kept within reasonable limits.
5.3 Operational risk
Operational risk is the risk of direct or indirect loss 
arising from a wide variety of causes associated with 
the Bank’s processes, personnel, technology and 
infrastructure and from external factors other than 
credit, market and liquidity risk such as those arising 
from legal and regulatory requirements and generally 
accepted standards of corporate behavior.
The Bank’s objective is to manage operational risk so 
as to balance the avoidance of financial losses and 
damage to the Bank’s reputation with overall cost 
effectiveness and to avoid control procedures that 
restrict initiative and creativity.
The primary responsibility for the development and 
implementation of controls to address operational 
risk is assigned to senior management within each 
business unit.  The responsibility is supported by 
the development of overall bank’s standard for the 
management of operational risk in the following areas:
• Requirement of appropriate segregation of 
duties, including the independent authorization 
of transactions;
• Requirements for the reconciliation and 
monitoring of transactions;
• Compliance with regulatory and other legal 
requirements;
• Documentation of controls and procedures;
• Requirements for the periodic assessment 
of operational losses faced and adequacy 
of controls and procedures to address risks 
identified;
• Requirement for the reporting of operational 
losses and proposed remedial action;
• Development of contingency plans;
• Training and professional development;
• Ethical and business standards;
• Risk mitigation including insurance where this is 
effective.
Compliance with bank’s standards is supported by a 
program of periodic reviews undertaken by internal 
audit, risk and compliance departments.  The results 
of these reviews are discussed with the management 
of the business unit to which they relate, with 
summaries submitted to executive committee, audit 
and compliance committee, governance and risk 
committee and the board.
Over the past three years, operational risks have 
reduced due to constant training, automation of many 
processes and enhancement in controls.5.4 Credit risk
Credit risk is the risk that the Bank will incur a loss 
because its customers or counterparties fail to 
discharge their contractual obligations. The Bank 
manages and controls credit risk by setting limits on 
the amount of risk it is willing to accept for individual 
counterparties and for industry concentrations, and 
by monitoring exposures in relation to such limits. 
Credit risk is monitored by the Credit Risk Department 
of the Bank. It is their responsibility to review and 
manage credit risk, for all types of counterparties. 
Credit risk consists of line credit risk managers who 
are responsible for their business lines and manage 
specific portfolios and experts who support both the 
line credit risk manager, as well as the business 
with tools like credit risk systems, policies, models 
and reporting. The Bank has established a credit 
quality review process to provide early identification 
of possible changes in the creditworthiness of 
counterparties, including regular collateral revisions. 
Counterparty limits are established by the use of a 
credit risk classification models, which assigns each 
counterparty a risk rating. Risk ratings are subject 
to regular revision. The credit quality review process 
aims to allow the Bank to assess the potential loss as 
a result of the risks to which it is exposed and take 
corrective actions.
For risk management reporting purposes, the Bank 
considers and consolidates all elements of credit risk 
exposure.
5.4.1 Management of credit risk
The Board of Directors has delegated responsibility for 
the management of credit risk to its Credit-Committee 
and Sub-Board Risk Management Committee.  A 
separate Credit department, reporting to the Executive 
Committee, is responsible for oversight of the Bank’s 
credit risk, including:
• Formulating credit policies in consultation with 
business units, covering collateral requirements, 
credit assessment, risk grading and reporting, 
documentary and legal procedures, and 
compliance with regulatory and statutory 
requirements.
• Establishing the authorisation structure for 
the approval and renewal of credit facilities. 
Authorisation limits are allocated to business 
units.  Larger facilities require approval by the 
Executive Committee members and the Board 
(Sub Committee) on risk management.
• Reviewing and assessing credit risk. The Credit 
department assesses all credit exposures in 
excess of designated limits, prior to facilities 
being committed to customers by the business 
unit concerned. Renewals and reviews of facilities 
are subject to the same review process.  Limiting 
concentrations of exposure to counterparties, 
geographies and industries (for loans and 
advances), and by issuer, credit rating band, 
market liquidity and country (for investment 
securities)..53         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 53• Developing and maintaining the Bank’s risk 
grading in order to categories exposures 
according to the degree of risk of financial 
loss faced and to focus management on the 
attendant risks.  The risk grading system is used 
in determining where impairment provisions may 
be required against specific credit exposures.  
The current risk grading framework consists of 
5 grades reflecting varying degrees of risk of 
default and the availability of collateral or other 
credit risk mitigation.  The responsibility for setting 
risk grades lies with the Board of Directors. Risk 
grades are subject to regular reviews by the Risk 
Management Department.
• Reviewing compliance of business units with 
agreed exposure limits, including those for 
selected industries, country risk and product 
types.  Regular reports are provided by the credit 
department on the credit quality of portfolios and 
appropriate corrective action is taken.
• Providing advice, guidance and specialist skills to 
business units to promote best practice throughout 
the Bank in the management of credit risk.
5.4.2. Credit–related commitments risks
The Bank makes available to its customers 
guarantees that may require that the Bank 
makes payments on their behalf and enters into 
commitments to extend credit lines to secure their 
liquidity needs. Letters of credit and guarantees 
(including standby letters of credit) commit the 
Bank to make payments on behalf of customers 
in the event of a specific act, generally related to 
the import or export of goods. Such commitments 
expose the Bank to similar risks to loans and are 
mitigated by the same control processes and 
policies management of credit risk.
5.4.3.  Definition of default and cure
The Bank considers a financial instrument 
defaulted and therefore Stage 3 (credit-impaired) 
for ECL calculations in all cases when the borrower 
becomes 90 days past due on its contractual 
payments. The Bank considers treasury and 
interbank balances defaulted and takes immediate 
action when the required intraday payments are 
not settled by the close of business as outlined in 
the individual agreements. As a part of a qualitative 
assessment of whether a customer is in default, 
the Bank also considers a variety of instances 
that may indicate unlikeliness to pay. When such 
events occur, the Bank carefully considers whether 
the event should result in treating the customer as 
defaulted and therefore assessed as Stage 3 for 
ECL calculations or whether Stage 2 is appropriate. 
Such events include:
• Internal rating of the borrower indicating default 
or near-default
• The borrower requesting emergency funding 
from the Bank
• The borrower is deceased• A material decrease in the underlying collateral 
value where the recovery of the loan is 
expected from the sale of the collateral
• A material decrease in the borrower’s turnover 
or the loss of a major customer
• A covenant breach not waived by the Bank
• The debtor facing financial difficulties
It is the Bank’s policy to consider a financial 
instrument as ‘cured’ and therefore re-classified 
out of Stage 3 when none of the default criteria 
have been present for at least five consecutive 
months. The decision whether to classify an asset 
as Stage 2 or Stage 1 once cured depends on the 
updated credit grade, at the time of the cure, and 
whether this indicates there has been a significant 
increase/decrease in credit risk compared to initial 
recognition.
5.4.4.  The Bank’s internal rating and PD estimation  
           process
The Bank’s Credit Risk Department operates its 
internal rating models. The Bank runs separate 
models for its key portfolios in which its customers 
are rate from 1 to 6 using internal grades. The 
models incorporate both qualitative and quantitative 
information and, in addition to information specific 
to the borrower, utilise supplemental external 
information that could affect the borrower’s ability to 
pay. Where practical, they also build on information 
from Credit Bureaus. These information sources 
are first used to determine the PDs within the 
Bank’s framework. The internal credit grades are 
assigned based on these Based II grades. PDs 
are then adjusted for IFRS 9 ECL calculations 
to incorporate forward looking information and 
the IFRS 9 Stage classification of the exposure. 
This is repeated for each economic scenario as 
appropriate.
Each exposure is allocated to a credit risk 
grade on initial recognition based on available 
information about the borrower. Exposures are 
subject to ongoing monitoring, which may result in 
an exposure being moved to a different credit risk 
grade. The monitoring typically involves use of the 
following data
Corporate Exposures: 
• Information obtained during periodic review 
of customer files – e.g. audited financial 
statements, management accounts, budgets 
and projections. Examples of areas of 
particular focus are: gross profit margins, 
financial leverage ratios, debt service 
coverage, compliance with covenants, quality 
of management, senior management changes.
5.4.5.  The Bank’s internal rating and PD estimation 
           process
Retail Exposures54         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 54• Internally collected data on customer behavior 
• Affordability metrics
• External data from credit reference agencies
• All Exposures
• Payment record – this includes overdue status 
as well as a range of variables about payment 
ratios
• Utilization of the granted limit
• Requests for and granting of restructuring
• Existing and forecast changes in business, 
financial and economic conditions
Generating the term structure of PD
• Credit risk grades are a primary input into the 
determination of the term structure of PD for 
exposures. The Bank collects performance 
and default information about its credit risk 
exposures analyzed by type of product and 
borrower as well as by credit risk grading. For 
some portfolios, information purchased from 
external credit reference agencies is also used. 
The Bank employs statistical models to analyse 
the data collected and generate estimates of 
the remaining lifetime PD of exposures and 
how these are expected to change as a result 
of the passage of time.
Bank’s internal rating
Grade 1-3: low fair risk
Advances in this category are those for which the 
borrower is up to date (i.e. current) with repayments 
of both principal and interest.  Indications that 
an overdraft is still current would include regular 
activity on the account with no sign that a hardcore 
of debt is building up.
Grade 4-5
Advances in this category are currently protected 
by adequate security, both as to principal and 
interest, but they are potentially weak and 
constitute an undue credit risk, although not to the 
point of justifying the classification of substandard.  
This category would include unusual advances 
due to the nature of the advance, customer or 
project, advances where there is a lack of financial 
information or any other advance where there is 
more than a normal degree of risk.
Grade 6
Substandard advances display well-defined credit 
weaknesses that jeopardise the liquidation of 
the debt.  Substandard advances include loans 
to borrowers whose cash flow is not sufficient to 
meet currently maturing debt, loans to borrowers 
which are significantly undercapitalised, and loans 
to borrowers lacking sufficient working capital 
to meet their operating needs.  Substandard 
advances are not protected by the current sound 
worth and paying capacity of the customer.Grade 7
Doubtful advances exhibit all the weaknesses 
inherent in advances classified as substandard 
with the added characteristics that the advances 
are not well-secured and the weaknesses make 
collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of 
currently existing facts, conditions and values, 
highly questionable and improbable.  The 
possibility of loss is extremely high, but because of 
certain important and reasonably specific pending 
factors, which may work to the advantage and 
strengthening of the advance, its classification as 
in estimated loss is deferred until its more exact 
status may be determined.
Non-performing loans and receivables which are 
at least 180 days overdue, but less than 360 days 
overdue are also classified as doubtful.
Grade 8
Advances classified as a loss are considered 
uncollectable and of such little value that their 
continuation as recoverable advances is not 
warranted.  This classification does not mean that 
the advance has absolutely no recovery value, but 
rather it is not practical or desirable to defer writing 
off this basically worthless advance even though 
partial recovery may be affected in the future.  
Advances classified as a loss include bankrupt 
companies and loans to insolvent firms with 
negative working capital and cash flow.  Banks 
should not retain advances on the books while 
attempting long-term recoveries.  Losses should 
be taken in the period in which they surface as 
uncollectable.
Non-performing loans and receivables which are 
360 days or more overdue are also classified as 
a loss.
5.4.6    Exposure at default
The exposure at default (EAD) represents the 
gross carrying amount of the financial instruments 
subject to the impairment calculation, addressing 
both the client’s ability to increase its exposure 
while approaching default and potential early 
repayments too. To calculate the EAD for a Stage 
1 loan, the Bank assesses the possible default 
events within 12 months for the calculation of 
the 12mECL. However, if a Stage 1 loan that is 
expected to default in the 12 months from the 
balance sheet date and is also expected to cure 
and subsequently default again, then all linked 
default events are considered. For Stage 2, Stage 
3 and POCI financial assets, the exposure at 
default is considered for events over the lifetime 
of the instruments.
The Bank determines EADs by modelling the range 
of possible exposure outcomes at various points 
in time, corresponding the multiple scenarios. The 
IFRS 9 PDs are then assigned to each economic 
scenario based on the outcome of Bank’s models.55         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 555.4.7    Loss given default
For corporate and investment banking financial 
instruments, LGD values are assessed at least 
every year by account managers and reviewed 
and approved by the Bank’s Credit Risk 
Department. The credit risk assessment is based 
on a standardised LGD assessment framework 
that results in a certain LGD rate. These LGD 
rates consider the expected EAD in comparison to 
the amount expected to be recovered or realised 
from any collateral held. The Bank segments its 
retail lending products into smaller homogeneous 
portfolios, based on key characteristic that are 
relevant to the estimation of future cash flows. 
The applied data is based on historically collected 
loss data and involves a wider set of transaction 
characteristics (e.g., product type, wider range of 
collateral types) as well as borrower characteristics. 
Further recent data and forward-looking economic 
scenarios are used in order to determine the IFRS 
9 LGD rate for each group of financial instruments. 
When assessing forward-looking information, 
the expectation is based on multiple scenarios. 
Examples of key inputs involve changes in, 
collateral values including property prices for 
mortgages, commodity prices, payment status or 
other factors that are indicative of losses in the 
Bank. The Bank estimates regulatory and IFRS 
9 LGDs on a different basis. Under IFRS 9, LGD 
rates are estimated for the Stage 1, Stage 2 and 
Stage 3 of each asset class. The inputs for these 
LGD rates are estimated and, where possible, 
calibrated through back testing against recent 
recoveries. These are repeated for each economic 
scenario as appropriate.
5.4.8    Significant increase in credit risk
The Bank continuously monitors all assets 
subject to ECLs. In order to determine whether an 
instrument or a portfolio of instruments is subject 
to 12mECL or LTECL, the Bank assesses whether 
there has been a significant increase in credit risk 
since initial recognition. The Bank considers an 
exposure to have significantly increased in credit 
risk when the IFRS 9 lifetime PD has doubled 
since initial recognition and has increased by more 
than 20 bps a year.
The Bank also applies a secondary qualitative 
method for triggering a significant increase 
in credit risk for an asset, such as moving a 
customer/facility to the watch list, or the account 
becoming forborne. In certain cases, the Bank 
may also consider that events explained earlier 
are a significant increase in credit risk as opposed 
to a default. Regardless of the change in credit 
grades, if contractual payments are more than 30 
days past due, the credit risk is deemed to have 
increased significantly since initial recognition.
When estimating ECLs on a collective basis for a 
group of similar assets, the Bank applies the same 
principles for assessing whether there has been 
a significant increase in credit risk since initial 
recognition.As explained earlier dependent on the factors 
below, the Bank calculates ECLs either on a 
collective or an individual basis.
Asset classes where the Bank calculates ECL on 
an individual basis include:
• All Stage 3 assets, regardless of the class of 
financial assets
• The Corporate lending portfolio
• The large and unique exposures of the Small 
business lending portfolio
• The treasury, trading and interbank 
relationships (such as Due from Banks, Cash 
collateral on securities borrowed and reverse 
repurchase agreements and debt instruments 
at amortised cost/FVOCI.
Asset classes where the Bank calculates ECL on 
a collective basis include the smaller and more 
generic balances of the Bank’s retail business 
lending
Incorporation of forward-looking information
The Bank incorporates forward-looking information 
into both the assessment of whether the credit risk 
of an instrument has increased significantly since 
its initial recognition and the measurement of ECL. 
The Bank formulates three economic scenarios:
• A base case, which is the median scenario 
assigned a 50% (2020: 70%) probability of 
occurring, and 
• two less likely scenarios; 
• one upside 15% (2019:15%) and 
• one downside 35% (2019:15%) probability of 
occurring.
The base case is aligned with information used 
by the Bank for other purposes such as strategic 
planning and budgeting. External information 
considered includes economic data and forecasts 
published by governmental bodies and monetary 
authorities. Periodically, the Bank carries out 
stress testing of more extreme shocks to calibrate 
its determination of the upside and downside 
representative scenarios.  The Bank has identified 
and documented key drivers of credit risk and credit 
losses for each portfolio of financial instruments 
and, using an analysis of historical data, has 
estimated relationships between macro-economic 
variables and credit risk and credit losses. The 
key drivers for credit risk are: GDP growth, and 
interest rates.
Analysis of average inputs to the ECL model under multiple 
economic scenarios per is detailed below
As at 31 December 2021
Key Drivers Scenario 2021
GDPBase case 6.30%
Upside 6.50%
Downside 5.50%56         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 56InflationBase case 9.00%
upside 8.90%
downside 10.80%
Interest ratesBase case 19.00%
upside 16.50%
downside 20.60%
Non Performing 
loan ratioBase case 21.59%
upside 20.25%
downside 22.80%
As at 31 December 2020
Key drivers Scenario 2020
GDP Base case 6.70%
Upside 7.30%
Downside 5.40%
Inflation Base case 7.90%
upside 7.70%
downside 8.30%
Interest rates Base case 19.00%
upside 17.00%
downside 19.80%
Non Performing 
loan ratioBase case 20.00%
upside 19.60%
downside 21.62%
5.4.9   Measurement of ECL
The key inputs into the measurement of ECL are 
the term structure of the following variables:
• probability of default (PD);
• loss given default (LGD); and
• exposure at default (EAD)
• GDP growth and interest rates.
12 months ECL for exposures in Stage 1 is 
calculated by multiplying the 12-month PD by LGD 
and EAD. Lifetime ECL is calculated by multiplying 
the lifetime PD by LGD and EAD. The methodology 
of estimating PDs, LGD and EAD has been 
discussed above.
5.4.10 Settlement Risk
• Settlement Risk is the risk that counterparty 
will fail to deliver cash (or securities) due to 
be delivered at a particular moment in time, following the release of the corresponding 
cash (or Securities) by the bank in settlement 
of a transaction. Further details in respect of 
this category of credit risk are contained in the 
Wholesale Credit Risk below.
• Intraday Exposure
Intraday Exposure is a revolving exposure, 
which arises whenever funds are irrevocably 
paid away by the Bank in the expectation of 
the receipt of cleared covering funds (or the 
deposit of collateral) at some time during 
the same business day. The Bank may be 
acting either in its own right, or on behalf of a 
customer, when it pays away the funds. The 
products, which give rise to Intraday Exposure, 
include forex settlements.
• The intraday credit, which the Bank allows 
its customers, is always in expectation of 
incoming funds, and as such the exposure is 
real in that it manifests itself as a borrowing/
overdraft when things go wrong. 
• The true extent of Intraday Exposure to a 
customer will be calculated as a single running 
balance taken at any one point in the day. This 
running balance will be adjusted by each single 
transfer of funds into and out of any account in 
that customer’s name, where such transfers 
represent cleared funds. The same principles 
apply when accounts are grouped (and where 
set-off is available) to produce an aggregate 
net exposure.
5.4.11 Credit Risk Transfers
• This risk arises when certain eligible collateral 
types (including risk participations, standby 
letters of credit and bank guarantees) are held 
to mitigate obligor risk. Whilst these instruments 
can significantly mitigate obligor credit risk, an 
alternative risk arises, being reimbursement 
risk - the risk that the participant/guarantor 
fails to honour their commitment in the event 
that the underlying obligor defaults (this is also 
referred to as double default risk).
5.4.12  Analysis of credit quality
The tables below set out information about the 
credit quality of financial assets and the allowance 
for impairment/loss held by the Bank against those 
assets.57         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 57Maximum exposure to credit risk
Bank 
BalancesLoans & 
advances to 
customerInvestment 
securitiesDue from 
BanksCommitments 
& guarantee
2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross 
amount735,718 603,607 2,745,387 2,318,364 2,400,655 2,222,139 610,779 1,085,063 174,527 354,752
Allowance for 
impairment- - (463,075) (406,376) - - (3,497) (3,122) (1,728) (24,811)
735,718 603,607 2,282,312 1,911,988 2,400,655 2,222,139 607,282 1,081,941 172,799 329,941
Bank 
BalancesLoans & 
advances to 
customersInvestment 
securitiesDue from  
other 
banksUndrawn 
Overdraft, 
Commitments 
& financial 
guarantees**
2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020 2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
At amortised 
cost  
Grade 1-3: 
low fair 
risk –
Current735,718 603,607 1,672,456 1,462,533 2,400,655 2,222,139 610,779 1,085,063 174,527 354,752
Grade 4-5: 
watch list – 
OLEM378,163 134,777 - - - - -
Grade 6: 
substandard43,748 70,755 - - - - - -
Grade 7: 
doubtful98,809 160,893 - - - - - -
Grade 8: 
loss- - 551,171 489,406 - - - - - -
Total gross 
amount735,718 603,607 2,745,387 2,318,364 2,400,655 2,222,139 610,779 1,085,063 174,527 354,752
Allowance 
for 
impairment- - (463,075) (406,376) - - (3,497) (3,122) (1,728) (24,811)
Net 
carrying 
amount735,718 603,607 2,282,312 1,911,988 2,400,655 2,222,139 607,282 1,081,941 172,799 329,941
**The commitments and guarantees are not held at amortised cost and the “net carrying amount should not be read in the same manner as for the 
other classes
5.4.13 Loans with renegotiated terms
Loans with renegotiated terms 2021 2020
Gross carrying amount 247,822 189,080
Expected credit loss - (5)
Net carrying amount 247,822 189,074
The contractual terms of a loan may be modified 
for a number of reasons, including changing 
market conditions, customer retention and 
other factors not related to a current or potential 
credit deterioration of the customer.  An existing 
loan may be derecognised and the renegotiated 
loan recognised as a new loan at fair value in 
accordance with the accounting policy set out in 
Notes 5.4.The Bank renegotiates loans to customers 
in financial difficulties to maximise collection 
opportunities and minimise the risk of default.  
Under the Bank’s forbearance policy, loan 
forbearance is granted on a selective basis if the 
debtor is currently in default on its debt or if there 
is a high risk of default, there is evidence that the 
debtor made all reasonable efforts to pay under 
the original contractual terms and the debtor is 
expected to be able to meet the revised terms.58         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 58The revised terms usually include extending the 
maturity, changing the timing of interest payments 
and amending the terms of loan covenants. Both 
retail and corporate loans are subject to the 
forbearance policy.
For the purposes of disclosures in these financial 
statements, ‘loans with renegotiated terms’ are 
defined as loans that have been restructured 
due to a deterioration in the borrower’s financial 
position, for which the Bank has made concessions 
by agreeing to terms and conditions that are more 
favourable for the borrower than the Bank had 
provided initially and that it would not otherwise 
consider.  A loan continues to be presented as 
part of loans with renegotiated terms until maturity, 
earlier repayment or until it is written off.
Irrespective of whether loans with renegotiated 
terms have been derecognised or not, they remain 
disclosed as impaired until there is sufficient 
evidence to demonstrate a significant reduction in 
the risk of non-payment of future cash flows and 
there are no other indicators of impairment.
When the contractual cash flows of a financial 
asset are renegotiated or otherwise modified, and 
the renegotiation or modification does not result 
in the derecognition of that financial asset, a bank 
shall recalculate the gross carrying amount of the 
financial asset and shall recognise a modification 
gain or loss in profit or loss. The gross carrying 
amount of the financial asset shall be recalculated 
as the present value of the renegotiated or modified 
contractual cash flows that are discounted at the 
financial asset’s original effective interest rate (or 
credit adjusted effective interest rate for purchased 
or originated credit-impaired financial assets).
Any costs or fees incurred adjust the carrying 
amount of the modified financial asset and 
areamortised over the remaining term of the 
modified financial asset
Loans and advances to customers
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 
Continuing to be impaired after 
restructuring (included in non-
performing loans)- 13,928
Impairment - 5
- 13,933
Non-impaired after restructuring 
– would otherwise have been 
impaired- 3,592
5.4.14 Collateral held and other credit enhancements,  
           and their financial effect
The Bank holds collateral and other credit 
enhancements against most of its credit 
exposures. The Bank holds collateral against 
loans and advances to customers in the form of cash, mortgage interests over property, other 
registered securities over assets, and guarantees. 
Estimates of fair value are based on the value of 
collateral assessed at the time of borrowing and 
generally updated when a loan is individually 
assessed as impaired. Collateral generally is not 
held over Interbank placements, except when 
securities are held as part of reverse repurchase 
and securities borrowing activity.  Collateral usually 
is not held against investment securities, and no 
such collateral was held at 31 December 2021. 
An estimate of the fair value of collateral and other 
security enhancements held against loans and 
advances to customers is shown below:
Loans and advances to customers
2021 2020
Against individually impaired GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Property 666,908 690,922
Others 8,803 20
Against neither past due 
nor impaired
Property 1,166,035 782,820
Others 251,754 113,862
Total 2,093,501 1,587,624
i.          Loans and advances to customers
The general creditworthiness of a customer tends 
to be the most relevant indicator of credit quality 
of a loan extended to it (see Note 5(i).  However, 
collateral provides additional security and the 
Bank generally requests that borrowers provide 
it.  The Bank may take collateral in the form of a 
first charge over real estate, floating charges over 
all assets and other liens and guarantees.  The 
Bank routinely update the valuation of collateral 
held against all loans to customers according to 
Section 79(1) of Act 930. For impaired loans, the 
Bank obtains appraisals of collateral because the 
current value of the collateral is an input to the 
impairment measurement.
ii.     Other types of collateral and credit    
 enhancements
In addition to the collateral obtained for loans, 
the Bank also holds other types of collateral and 
credit enhancements such as second charges 
and floating charges for which specific values are 
not generally available.
iii.     Assets obtained by taking possession of   
 collateral
Repossessed items are not recognized in the 
bank’s books.  Proceeds from their sale are used 
to reduce related outstanding indebtedness.  The 
Bank has in its possession assets resulting from 
taking possession of collateral held as security 
against loans and advances at the reporting date 
(2019: nil). The carrying amount of the property 
are based on court judgments and valuation by the 
court.59         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 59Loans and Advances to customers
2021 2020
Gross amount GH¢’000 % GH¢’000 %
Concentration by industry:
Agriculture 642,834 23.4 516,646 22.3
Manufacturing 43,070 1.6 34,135 1.5
Commerce & Finance 529,768 19.3 573,380 24.7
Transport & communications 168,098 6.1 153,636 6.6
Mining and quarrying 142 0.0 0 0.0
Building & construction 358,122 13.0 186,302 8.0
Services 1,003,353 36.5 802,441 34.6
Electricity, GAS and water 0 0.0 51,823 2.2
2,745,387 100 2,318,364 100
Concentration by product
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
a) Loans and advances to individual customers:
Overdraft 99,251 65,197
Term loans 874,783 500,733
974,034 565,930
b) Loans to corporate entities:
Overdrafts 448,861 447,091
Terms loans 1,322,492 1,305,343
1,771,353 1,752,434
Gross loans and advances (a+b) 2,745,387 2,318,364
5.4.15  Concentrations of credit risk continued
Investment securities 
 These are investments in Government Treasury Bills, Notes and Bonds.
5.4.16   Regulatory Provisions
An account is considered to be in default when payment is not received on due date.  Accounts that are overdue 
by more than 90 days are considered delinquent.  These accounts are closely monitored and subjected to a 
collection process.  The process used for provisions is based on Bank of Ghana guidelines which recognize Loans and advances to customers  
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Against individually impaired property 56,390 400
iv.     Offsetting financial assets and financial 
 liabilities
The Bank did not hold any financial assets and financial liabilities that are off-set in the statement of financial 
position at the reporting date.
The Bank monitors concentrations of credit risk by sector. An analysis of concentrations of credit risk from loans 
and advances, and investment securities is shown below.60         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 605.5    Liquidity risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Bank is unable to meet its payment obligations associated with its financial 
liabilities when they fall due and be able to replace funds when they are withdrawn.  The consequence may be the 
failure to meet obligations to repay depositors and fulfil commitments to lend.
Management of liquidity risk
The Bank’s approach to managing liquidity is to ensure, as far as possible, that it will always have sufficient 
liquidity to meet its liabilities when due, under both normal and stressed conditions, without incurring unacceptable 
losses or risking damage to the Bank’s reputation.
The treasury department maintains a portfolio of short-term liquid assets, largely made up of short-term liquid 
investment securities, loans and advances to banks and other inter-bank facilities, to ensure that sufficient liquidity 
is maintained within the Bank as a whole.
Exposure to liquidity risk
The key measure used by the Bank for managing liquidity risk is the ratio of net liquid assets to deposits from 
customers.  For this purpose, net liquid assets are considered as including cash and cash equivalents and 
investment grade debt securities for which there is an active and liquid market less any deposits from banks, debt 
securities issued, other borrowings and commitments maturing within the next month.
For the definition of liquidity risk and information on how liquidity risk is managed by the Bank, Details of the 
reported Bank’s ratio of net liquid assets to deposits from customers at the reporting date and during the reporting 
period were as follows:
2021 2020
% %
At 31 December 1.87 44.98
Maximum for the period 16.73 44.98
Minimum for the period                                                                                  1.87 23.06
Average for the period 9.51 32.75
The table below presents the cash flows payable under non-derivative financial liabilities for managing liquidity 
risk by remaining contractual maturities at the date of the statement of financial position.  The amounts disclosed 
in the table are the contractual undiscounted cash flows however, the Bank manages the liquidity risk based on a 
different basis not resulting in a significantly different analysiscash as a credit mitigate.  Individual provisions are made for outstanding amounts depending on the number 
of days past due with full provisions made after 360 days.  In certain situations, such as bankruptcy, fraud 
and death, the loss recognition process is accelerated.  Loans and advances less than 90 days past due are 
generally not considered delinquent unless other information is available to indicate otherwise.
The Bank of Ghana Guideline is as set out below:
Grade Description Number of days Provisions (%)
Current Less than 30 days 1
Other Loans Exceptionally Mentioned (OLEM) 30 to less than 90 days 10
Substandard 90 to less than 180 days 25
Doubtful 180 to less than 360 days 50
Loss 360 days and above 10061         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 612021 Carrying 
AmountGross 
nominalUp to 1 
month1-3months  3 to 6 
months 6 months 
-1 years1 to 5 years Over 5 
years
inflow/
outflow
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Financial liabilities by 
type
Non-derivative liabilities
Deposits from customer 4,927,216 4,938,347 1,195,941 1,732,182        
282,647 679,267 1,048,310                   
-   
Borrowed Funds 294,559 334,324 78,709 225 -   321 67,543 187,527
Total financial liabilities 5,221,775 5,272,671 1,274,651 1,732,407 282,647 679,587 1,115,853 187,527
Financial assets by type
Cash and bank balance 924,619 924,619 924,619 - - - - -
Due from other Banks 346,219 383,719 - - - - 383,719 -
Investment securities 2,400,655 2,400,655 198,891 - 911,716 326,778 804,321 158,950
Investments (other than 
securities)99,926 99,926 - - - - 91,886 -
Loans and advances to 
customers2,282,312 2,745,387 667,992 198,094 246,148 155,356 1,238,790 239,007
Assets held for managing 
liquidity risk6,053,731 6,554,306 1,791,502 198,094 1,157,864 482,134 2,518,715 397,957
Net Liquidity gap 831,956 1,281,882 516,887 (1,534,259) 875,233 (197,398) 1,402,949 210,430
2020 Carrying 
AmountGross 
nominalUp to 1 
month1-3months  3 to 6 
months 6 months -
1 years1 to 5 
yearsOver 5 
years
inflow/
outflow
 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Financial liabilities by type         
Non-derivative liabilities         
Deposits from customer 4,281,037 4,291,292 959,079 1,405,200 312,306 632,810 981,897 -   
Borrowed Funds 313,173 377,621 54,511 42,930 1,070 - 16,252 262,859 
Total financial liabilities 4,594,210 4,668,913 1,013,589 1,448,130 313,376 632,810 998,149 262,859 
Financial assets by type         
Cash and bank balance 755,756 755,756 755,756 - -   -   -   -   
Due from other Banks 309,098 312,220 -   -   -   -   312,220 -   
Investment securities 2,531,237 2,531,237 359,992 305,280 1,012,224 91,102 294,541 159,000 
Investments (other than securities) 91,892 102,342 -   -   - -   102,342 -   
Loans and advances to customers 1,911,988 2,318,364 618,649 152,574 225,906 167,847 722,251 431,136 
Assets held for managing liquidity risk 5,599,970 6,019,919 1,734,398 457,854 1,238,130 258,949 1,431,354 590,136 
Net Liquidity gap 1,005,760 1,351,006 720,809 (990,276) 924,755 (373,862) 433,205 327,277 
5.6    Market risk
 For the definition of market risk and information on the metrics (and their limitations) used by the Bank to manage      
the market risks of non-trading portfolios
5.6.1 Interest rate risk and foreign currency risk
 The Bank uses the Reuters system to monitor live interest and exchange rates to facilitate trading by the treasury 
department.  This helps the Bank to know what is happening at any moment in time on the markets and where 
opportunities are present to make gains from higher interest rates. Interest rate risk is managed principally through 
monitoring interest rate gaps and by having pre-approved limits for reprising bands. The ALCO is the monitoring 
body for compliance with these limits and is assisted by Risk Management in its day-to-day monitoring activities.  
A summary of the Bank’s interest rate gap position on non-trading portfolios is as follows:62         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 62As at 31 December 2021 Up to 1
month1-3 
months3 months
less than 6 
months6 months
less than 1 1-5 years Over 5 
yearsTotal
Financial assets
Cash and cash equivalent 924,619 -    -   -   -   -   924,619
Investment in Government securities 198,891 - 911,716 326,778 804,321 158,950 2,400,655
Loans and advances to customers (net) 296,767 146,011 1,203,567  238,107 188,549 209,311 2,282,312
Total financial assets 1,420,277 146,011 2,115,283 564,885 992,869 368,261 5,607,587
Financial liabilities
Customer deposits 1,194,417 1,727,401 279,188 678,384 857,718 190,577 4,927,685
Borrowed funds 78,709 216.29 -   306 62,376 135,359 276,966
Total financial liabilities 1,273,126 1,727,617 279,188 678,690 920,094 325,936 5,204,651
Interest rate sensitivity gap 147,151 (1,581,607) 1,836,095 (113,804) 72,775 42,325 402,935 
As at 31 December 2020 Up to 1
month1-3 
months3 months
less than 6 
months6 months
less than 11-5 years Over 5 
yearsTotal
Financial assets
Cash and cash equivalent 755,756 -   -   -   -   -   755,756
Investment in Government securities 359,992 305,280 1,012,224 91,102 294,541 159,000 2,222,139
Loans and advances to customers (net) 263,613 160,335 700,415 216,217 149,056 422,352 1,911,988
Total financial assets 1,379,361 465,616 1,712,639 307,319 443,597 581,352 4,889,883
Financial liabilities
Customer deposits 958,471 1,401,948 306,518 632,351 803,370 178,527 4,281,184
Borrowed funds 54,511 42,930 1,070 - 13,311 201,353 313,173
Total financial liabilities 1,012,982 1,444,877 307,587 632,351 816,681 379,879 4,594,357
Interest rate sensitivity gap 366,379 (979,262) 1,405,052 325,031 (373,084) 201,472 295,526
• Sensitivity analysis - Increase/decrease of 10% in net interest margin The interest rate risks sensitivity analysis 
is based on the following assumptions: 
• Changes in the market interest rates affect the interest income or expenses of variable financial instruments; 
• Changes in the market interest rates only affect interest income or expenses in relation to financial     instruments 
with fixed interest rates if these are recognised at their fair values;
• The interest rate changes will have an effect on interest sensitive assets and liabilities and hence simulation 
modelling is applied to financial instruments which are quoted at variable interest rates; and
• The projections make other assumptions including that all positions run to maturity.
The table below sets out the impact on current profit after taxation and equity of an incremental 10% parallel fall 
or rise on all yield curves at the beginning of the financial years beginning on 01 January 2021 and 01 January 
2020 respectively.
2021 Scenario 1 Scenario 2
Base Effect of 10% increase in variable interest rate Effect of 10% decrease in variable interest rate
Profit after tax 81,602 129,635 33,570
Equity 938,784 986,817 890,752
2020 Scenario 1 Scenario 2
Base Effect of 10% increase in variable interest rate Effect of 10% decrease in variable interest rate
Profit after tax 65,403 81,883 48,924
Equity 850,623 867,102 834,143
Assuming no management actions an increase in interest rates would increase the Bank’s profit after tax for the 
year by GH¢ 33,570 (2020: increase after tax by GH¢ 48,924) and increase equity by GH¢ 890,752 (2020: GH¢ 
834,143), while a fall would decrease profit after tax and equity by the same amounts.63         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 635.6.2 Foreign exchange risk
The Bank takes on exposure to the effects of fluctuations in the prevailing foreign currency exchange rates on its 
financial position and cash flows. The Board sets limits on the level of exposure by currency and in aggregate.
The table below summarises the Bank’s exposure to foreign currency exchange rate risk at 31 December 2021.  
The amounts stated in the table below are the Ghana Cedi equivalent of the foreign currencies.
As at 31 December 2021 USD     GBP    EUR Other Total 
Assets GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 
Cash and cash equivalent 136,640 22,197 15,883 - 174,721 
Loans and advances to customers (net) 284,619 1 208,254 - 492,873 
Investment Securities 30,247 - 159 - 30,406 
Other assets 20,452 1 - - 20,453 
Total financial assets 471,958 22,199 224,296 - 718,453
Liabilities
Deposits from customers 438,237 18,426 32,355 768 489,786 
Borrowings 13,409 - 170,087 - 183,496 
Other liabilities 14,558 27 31 80 14,696 
Total financial liabilities 466,204 18,453 202,473 848 687,978 
Net on balance sheet position 5,754 3,746 21,823 848 30,475 
Contingent liabilities (2021) 109,024 218 424 - 109,666 
As at 31 December 2020 USD     GBP    EUR Other Total
Total financial assets 388,202 14,848 238,322 2 641,374 
Total financial liabilities                                            383,089 14,546 238,844 1 636,480 
Net on balance sheet position 5,113 302 (522) 1 4,894
Contingent liabilities (2020) 82,740 - - - 82,740
The following mid inter-bank exchange rates were applied during the year:
Average rate Reporting rate
2021 2020 2021 2020
 Cedis to
 US$ 1 5.8137 5.6129 6.0061 5.7602
 GBP 1 7.9793 7.2521 8.1272 7.8742
 EUR 1 6.8431 6.4437 6.8281 7.0643
Sensitivity Analysis on Currency Risks
The following table shows the effect of the strengthening or weakening of the GH¢ against all other currencies 
on the company’s income statement.  This sensitivity analysis indicates the potential impact on the income 
statements based upon the foreign currency exposures recorded at 31 December 2021.  (See “currency risk” 
above) and it does not represent actual or future gains or losses.
A strengthening/weakening of the GH¢ by 5% against the following currencies at 31 December would have 
increased/decreased equity and income statement by the amounts shown below:
This analysis assumes that all other variables, in particular interest rates, remain constant.64         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 642021 2020
Income 
Statement/
Equity Impact Income 
Statement/
Equity 
Impact Income 
Statement/Equity 
Impact Income 
Statement/
Equity 
Impact 
Change Strengthening Weakening Change Strengthening Weakening
In GH¢’000
US$ 5% (94) 94 5% (256) 256
£ 5% (187) 187 5% (15) 15
€ 5% (238) 238 5% 26 (26)
Market Risk
All trading instruments are subject to market risk, the risk that future changes in market conditions may make an 
instrument less valuable or more onerous.  The instruments are recognised at fair value, and all changes in market 
directions directly affect net trading income.
Exposure to market risk is formally managed in accordance with risk limits set by senior management by buying 
or selling instruments or entering into offsetting positions.
5.6.3  Cashflow sensitivity analysis for variable rate instruments 
A change of 100 basis points in interest rates at the reporting date will have increased/decreased profit or loss 
by amounts shown below.  Each analysis assumes all other variables in particular foreign currency rates remain 
constant. 
The analysis is performed on the same basis for 2021.
Effects in Cedis 100bp 100bp
Increase Decrease
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
31-Dec-21
Average for the Period 4,803 (4,803)
Maximum for the Period 7,282 (7,282)
Minimum for the Period 2,479 (2,479)
31-Dec-20
Average for the Period 4,154 (4,154)
Maximum for the Period 6,290 (6,290)
Minimum for the Period 2,135 (2,135)
The Bank’s operations are subject to the risk of interest rate fluctuations to the extent that interest earning 
assets (including investments) and interest-bearing liabilities mature or re-price at different times or in differing 
amounts.  In the case of floating rate assets and liabilities the Bank is also exposed to basis risk, which is the 
difference between re-pricing characteristics of the various floating rate indices, such as the savings rate and six 
months LIBOR and different types of interest.  Risk management activities are aimed at optimizing net interest 
income, given market interest rate levels consistent with the Bank’ s strategies.
Asset-liability risk management activities are conducted in the context of the Bank’s sensitivity to interest rate 
changes.  The actual effect will depend on a number of factors, including the extent to which repayments are 
made earlier to later than the contracted dates and variations in interest rate sensitivity within re-pricing periods 
and amongst currencies.
The rates above show the extent to which the Bank’s interest rate exposures on assets and liabilities are 
matched.  These are allocated to time bands by reference to the earlier of the next contractual interest rate re-
pricing date and maturity.65         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 655.7     CAPITAL MANAGEMENT
5.7.1    Regulatory Capital
The Central Bank of Ghana sets and monitors capital requirements for the Bank.
The Bank’s objectives when managing capital are:
• To safeguard the Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern so that it can continue to provide returns for 
the shareholders and benefits for the other stakeholders
• To maintain a strong capital base to support the current and future development needs of the business
• To comply with the capital requirements set by the Central Bank of Ghana
Capital adequacy and use of regulatory capital are monitored by management employing techniques based on 
the guidelines developed by the Central Bank of Ghana for supervisory purposes. The required information is 
filed with the Central Bank of Ghana on a monthly basis
The Central Bank requires each bank to:
a. Hold the minimum level of regulatory capital of GH¢400 million. 
b. Maintain a ratio of total regulatory capital; to risk weighted assets plus risk weighted off balance assets at 
above the required minimum of 10%
The Bank’s regulatory capital is analysed into two tiers:
• Tier 1 capital, which includes equity share capital, share premium, perpetual bonds (which are classified as 
innovative Tier 1 securities), retained earnings, translation reserve and minority interests after deductions 
for goodwill and intangible assets, and other regulatory adjustments relating to items that are included in 
equity but are treated differently for capital adequacy purposes Tier 2 capital, which includes capitalised 
revaluations reserves, latent revaluation reserves, undisclosed reserves, revaluation reserves, subordinated 
Loans and Hybrid Capital subject to a limit of 100% of Tier 1 Capital.
The Bank’s policy is to maintain a strong capital base so as to maintain investor, creditor and market confidence 
and to sustain future development of the business.  The impact of the level of capital on shareholders’ return is 
also recognised and the Bank recognises the need to maintain a balance between the higher returns that might 
be possible with greater gearing and the advantages and security afforded by a sound capital position.
5.7.2    Capital adequacy ratio
The capital adequacy ratio is the quotient of the capital base of the Bank and the Bank’s risk-weighted asset 
base. In accordance with Central Bank of Ghana regulations, a minimum ratio of 10% is to be maintained
The Bank’s regulatory capital position at 31 December 2021, was as follows:
2021
GH¢’000
Tier 1 Capital
Equity share capital 698,700
Retained earnings (236,645)
Statutory reserve 182,015
Other regulatory adjustment (235,999)
CET1 Capital after Deductions (B) 408,071
Fair Value Reserves 58,356
Revaluation reserve 28,766
Disallowed (limited to 2% of RWA) (21,775)
Tier 2 Capital 65,347 
Total Regulatory Capital (Tier 1 + Tier 2) 473,418
Credit risk
Risk weighted assets
On-balance sheet items 2,559,977
Off-balance sheet items 49,354
On & Off-Balance Sheet Trading Book RWA66         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 661.4 Credit Risk Reserve (CRR) 178,298
1.5 Total Credit Risk Equivalent Weighted Asset (RWA) 2,431,033
Operational Risk 821,484
Market Risk 14,813
Total Credit Risk Equivalent Weighted Asset (RWA) 3,267,329 
Section C: Risk ratios
1. Risk-based capital ratios
1.1 Common Equity Tier 1 / RWA 12.49 
1.2 Additional Tier 1 / RWA -   
1.3 Tier 1 / RWA 12.49 
1.4 Tier 2 / RWA 2.00 
1.5 Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) 14.49 
5.7.2  Capital adequacy ratio
 2020
 GH¢’000 
Tier 1 Capital
Equity share capital 698,700
Retained earnings (252,235)
Statutory reserve 141,214
Other regulatory adjustment (203,476)
CET1 Capital after Deductions (B) 384,203
Fair Value Reserves 52,326
Revaluation reserve 28,766
Unaudited Profit -   
Disallowed (limited to 2% of RWA) (21,371)
Tier 2 Capital 59,721 
Total Regulatory Capital (Tier 1 + Tier 2) 443,924
Credit risk
Risk weighted assets
On-balance sheet items 2,166,040
Off-balance sheet items 230,404
On & Off-Balance Sheet Trading Book RWA
1.4 Credit Risk Reserve (CRR) (153,088)
1.5 Total Credit Risk Equivalent Weighted Asset (RWA) 2,243,356
Operational Risk 734,162
Market Risk 8,465
Total Credit Risk Equivalent Weighted Asset (RWA) 2,985,983 
Section C: Risk ratios
1. Risk-based capital ratios
1.1 Common Equity Tier 1 / RWA 12.87 
1.2 Additional Tier 1 / RWA -   
1.3 Tier 1 / RWA 12.87 
1.4 Tier 2 / RWA 2.00 
1.5 Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) 14.87 67         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 675.7.3  REVIEW OF CAPITAL ADEQUACY RATIO
The allocation of capital between specific 
operations and activities is, to a large extent, 
driven by optimization of the return achieved 
on the capital allocated.  The amount of capital 
allocated to each operation or activity is based 
primarily upon the regulatory capital, but in some 
cases the regulatory requirements do not reflect 
fully the varying degree of risk associated with 
different activities.  In such cases the capital 
requirements may be flexed to reflect differing 
risk profiles, subject to the overall level of capital 
to support a particular operation or activity not 
falling below the minimum required for regulatory 
purposes.  The process of allocating capital to 
specific operations and activities is undertaken 
independently by the Bank Credit Committee and 
or ALCO as appropriate.
Although maximization of the return on risk-
adjusted capital is the principal basis used in 
determining how capital is allocated within the 
Bank to particular operations or activities, it is not 
the sole basis used for decision making. Account 
also is taken of synergies with other operations 
and activities, the availability of management and 
other resources, and the fit of the activity with 
the Bank’s longer-term strategic objectives.  The 
Bank’s policies in respect of capital management 
and allocation are reviewed regularly by the Board 
of Directors
5.7.4    MINIMUM CAPITAL REQUIREMENT
In accordance with Section 28 (1) of the Banks and 
Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 
(Act 930), the Bank of Ghana (BOG) increased 
the minimum capital requirement for commercial 
banks from GH¢ 120 million to GH¢ 400 million.
The Directive required all Banks to comply with the 
new capital requirement by the end of December 
2018.  Non-compliance with the new minimum 
paid up capital requirement shall be dealt with 
in accordance with section 33 of the Banks and 
Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 
(Act 930).
• Banks are required to meet the new capital 
requirements using either of the following 
methods:
• Fresh capital injection;
• Capitalisation of retained earnings; and
• A combination of fresh capital injection and 
capitalisation of retained earnings.
6.      FAIR VALUES OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
The fair values of financial assets and financial 
liabilities that are traded in active markets are 
based on quoted market prices or dealer price 
quotations.  For all other financial instruments, the 
Bank determines fair values using other valuation 
techniques.For financial instruments that trade infrequently 
and have little price transparency, fair value is 
less objective, and requires varying degrees of 
judgment depending on liquidity, concentration, 
uncertainty of market factors, pricing assumptions 
and other risks affecting the specific instrument.
a.       Valuation models
The Bank measures fair values using the following 
fair value hierarchy, which reflects the significance 
of the inputs used in making the measurements.
Level 1: Inputs that are quoted market prices 
(unadjusted) in active markets for identical 
instruments..
Level 2: Inputs other than quoted prices included 
within Level 1 that are observable either directly 
(i.e. as prices) or indirectly (i.e. derived from 
prices).  This category includes instruments valued 
using: quoted market prices in active markets for 
similar instruments; quoted prices for identical or 
similar instruments in markets that are considered 
less than active; or other valuation techniques in 
which all significant inputs are directly or indirectly 
observable from market data.
Level 3: Inputs that are unobservable. This 
category includes all instruments for which the 
valuation technique includes inputs not based on 
observable data and the unobservable inputs have 
a significant effect on the instrument’s valuation.  
This category includes instruments that are valued 
based on quoted prices for similar instruments 
for which significant unobservable adjustments 
or assumptions are required to reflect differences 
between the instruments.
Valuation techniques include net present value 
and discounted cash flow models, comparison 
with similar instruments for which market 
observable prices exist and other valuation 
models.  Assumptions and inputs used in valuation 
techniques include risk-free and benchmark 
interest rates, credit spreads and other premia 
used in estimating discount rates and foreign 
currency exchange rates and expected price 
volatilities and correlations.
The objective of valuation techniques is to arrive 
at a fair value measurement that reflects the price 
that would be received to sell the asset or paid 
to transfer the liability in an orderly transaction 
between market participants at the measurement 
date.
Observable prices or model inputs are usually 
available in the market for listed debt and equity 
securities, exchange-traded derivatives and simple 
over-the-counter derivatives such as interest rate 
swaps.
Availability of observable market prices and 
model inputs reduces the need for management 
judgement and estimation and also reduces the 68         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 68uncertainty associated with determining fair values.  Availability of observable market prices and inputs varies 
depending on the products and markets and is prone to changes based on specific events and general conditions 
in the financial markets.
b. Financial instruments measured at fair value – fair value hierarchy
The following table analyses financial instruments measured at fair value at the reporting date, by the level in the 
fair value hierarchy into which the fair value measurement is categorised. The amounts are based on the values 
recognised in the statement of financial position.
2021 Total
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 fair value
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Investment (Other than Securities) - 99,926 - 99,926
- 99,926 - 99,926
2020 Total
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 fair value
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Investment (Other than Securities) - 91,892 - 91,892
- 91,892 - 91,892
Equity instruments  - Investment (Other than Securities)
The bank has equity in non-listed entities, the investment is initially recognized at transaction price and re-
measured (to the extent information is available) and valued on case by case basis. The fair values of equity 
instruments are determined using market proxy.
2021 Core range of inputs
GH¢’000 Low High Unit
Level 2 
Assets
GH¢’000Valuation 
TechniqueSignificant 
unobservable
inputs  
Equity 100,631 Market ProxyEV/EBITDA 
proxy
Price /Book 
proxy11.9
0.6514.9
1.57Basis point
Basis point
2020 Core range of inputs
GH¢’000 Low High Unit
Level 2 
Assets
GH¢’000Valuation 
TechniqueSignificant 
unobservable
inputs  
Equity 91,892Market 
ProxyEV/EBITDA 
proxy
Price /Book 
proxy12.2
0.713.0
1.1Basis point
Basis point
c. Fair value of financial instruments not measured at fair value
Set out below is a comparison, by class, of the carrying amounts and fair values of the Bank’s financial instruments 
that are not carried at fair value in the financial statements. This table does not include the fair values of non–
financial assets and non–financial liabilities:69         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 692021 Fair Value
In GH¢'000 Carrying Value Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Financial assets: 
Due from other Banks 346,219 - - 383,719 383,719
Investment securities 2,400,655 - 1,238,494 794,489 2,032,983
Loans and advances to customers 2,282,312 - 1,267,590 1,477,797 2,745,387
5,029,186 - 2,506,084 2,656,005 5,162,089
Financial liabilities 
Borrowed funds 294,559 - 79,255 255,069 334,324
2020 Fair Value
In GH¢'000 Carrying Value Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Financial assets: 
Due from other Banks 309,098 - - 262,395 262,395
Loans and advances to customers 1,911,988 - 1,173,376 1,301,765 2,475,141
2,221,086 - 1,173,376 1,564,160 2,737,536
Financial liabilities 
Borrowed funds 313,173 - 96,535 131,584 228,119
Any other financial instruments not disclosed on the table above have their carrying amount approximate to the 
fair value.
Due from other Banks
The fair values of these instrument are estimated by a discounted cash flow model based on contractual cash 
flows using estimated yields incorporating the counterparties’ credit risk.
Loans and advances to customers
The fair values of loans and advances are estimated by discounted cash flow models that incorporate 
assumptions for credit risks, foreign exchange risk, probability of default and loss given default estimates.
Borrowed funds
The fair value of borrowed funds is estimated by a discounted cash flow model using market rate for similar 
instruments trading in the market.
7a.      OPERATING SEGMENTS
Operating segments
Segment information is presented in respect of the Bank’s business segments. The primary format, business 
segments, is based on the Bank’s management and internal reporting structure.  
Business segments pay and receive interest to and from the Central Treasury on an arm’s length basis to reflect 
the borrowing from or placement into the pool of investments.
Segment capital expenditure is the total cost incurred during the period to acquire property and equipment and 
intangible assets other than goodwill.
The Bank does not have reliance on a single major customer. The total revenue of the Bank during the year 
was not earned from transactions with a single external customer. No single customer contributed 10 per cent 
or more of an entity’s revenues.
Business segments
The Bank has the following main business segments:
• Corporate Banking: includes loans, deposits and other transactions and balances with corporate customers 
including the Agricultural sector.
• Retail Banking: includes loans, deposits and other transactions and balances with retail customers.
• Central Treasury: undertakes the Bank’s funding and centralized risk management activities through 
borrowings, issues of debt securities for risk management purposes and investing in liquid assets such as 
short-term placements and corporate and government debt securities.70         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 70The Bank also has a central Shared Services operation that provides support services to the above-mentioned 
segments, manages the Bank’s premises and certain corporate costs.  Cost-sharing agreements are used to 
allocate central costs to business segments on a reasonable basis.
2021Corporate 
BankingRetail 
BankingCentral 
TreasuryShared 
Services Unallocated Consolidated
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Net Interest Income 38,067 68,763 389,377 (15,881) - 480,326 
Net fee and commission income 14,123 72,846 1,967 2,268 -   91,204 
Net trading income 2,880 15,934 37,061 -   -   55,875 
Other operating income 377 57 -   11,978 -   12,412 
Inter segment revenue 9,120 239,506 (248,626) -   -   -
Total segment revenue 64,567 397,105 179,778 (1,635) -   639,815 
Segment result
Income tax expense -   -   -   (44,494) -   (44,494)
Profit for the period 16,297 190,370 176,407 (301,472) - 81,602 
Total assets 887,582 1,394,730 3,671,493 500,844 -   6,454,649 
Total Segment liabilities 1,339,514 3,487,471 70,958 323,831 294,090 5,515,864 
Impairment losses on financial assets (31,814) (9,967) -   -   - (41,781)
Depreciation and amortisation (2,680) (19,121) (500) (44,644) -  (66,946)
Capital expenditure (205) (13,150) (241) (21,984) - (35,579)
2020Corporate 
BankingRetail 
BankingCentral 
TreasuryShared 
ServicesUnallocated Consolidated
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Net Interest Income 56,553 29,847 334,559 (5,546) - 415,413
Net fee and commission income 14,717 48,649 1,248 10,801 - 75,414
Net trading income 2,765 12,043 37,804 - - 52,611
Other operating income 644 887 - 9,001 - 10,533
Inter segment revenue (5,863) 229,518 (223,655) - - 0
Total segment revenue 68,816 320,944 149,957 14,256 - 553,972
Segment result
Income tax expense (5,077) (13,269) (13,940) - - (32,286)
Profit for the period 53,626 140,153 147,240 (243,329) - 97,690
Total assets 817,675 1,055,765 3,286,993 516,813 38,548 5,715,794
Total Segment liabilities 1,263,665 2,954,757 62,614 313,173 270,961 4,865,171
Impairment losses on financial assets (23,163) - - (23,163)
Depreciation and amortization (1,941) (13,235) (372) (46,009) - (61,556)
Capital expenditure (127) (6,243) (14) (32,251) - (38,635)
7b.   INTEREST INCOME                    
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Loans and advances 296,705 265,451
Investment in Government securities                                                                            359,215 292,911
Inter bank placement 49,713 53,572
Leases (including agric inputs) 22,602 17,025
728,235 628,95971         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 717c.  INTEREST INCOME ANALYSIS
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Interest revenue calculated using effective interest method 705,633 611,934
Other interest and similar income 22,602 17,025
728,235 628,959
8.   INTEREST EXPENSE
a.   On deposits:
2021 2020
Interest expense calculated using effective interest method GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Fixed/time deposits 59,762 50,758
Savings deposits 12,176 9,816
Demand & call deposits 152,452 132,977
Total interest expense on deposits 224,390 193,551
b.   On borrowed funds:
2021 2020
Inter-Bank Borrowing 540 433 
Long-Term Borrowings 9,348 7,574
Interest on lease liability 13,631 11,988
23,519 19,995
Total (a+b) 247,909 213,546
9.  NET FEE AND COMMISSION INCOME
2021 2020
Fee and commission Income GH¢ ‘000 GH¢ ‘000
Commission on Turnover 23,633 26,441
Fees and Charges 75,292 58,080
Sale of Cheque Book Charges 1,169 812
Guarantees Charges & Commission 1,225 2,252
Total Fee and Commission Income 101,319 87,585
Fee and commission expense
2021 2020
Cost of Services (10,116) (12,171)
Total Fee and Commission Expense (10,116) (12,171)
Net Fee and Commission Income 91,203 75,414
All fees and commission income were earned at a point in time.
10.   NET TRADING INCOME
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Foreign Exchange
Translation gains less losses 15,730 18,089
Transaction gains less losses 40,144 34,523
55,874 52,61172         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 7211.  OTHER OPERATING INCOME
2021 2020
Bad debts recovered 4,263 5,944
Dividends from investments - 186
Other income* 8,149 4,403
Total 12,412 10,533
* Other income is made up of unutilized provisions on expenses                       
12.   IMPAIRMENT LOSS ON FINANCIAL ASSETS                                                         
The table below shows the Expected Credit Loss charges on financial instruments for the year recorded in the 
income statement:
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Letter of credit and guarantee (16,847) - - (16,847)
Undrawn commitments (6,237) - - (6,237)
Due from Banks 375 - - 375
Loans and advances (13,990) 27,114 51,366 64,490
At 31 December 2021 (36,699) 27,114 51,366 41,781
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Letter of credit and guarantee 14,591 - - 14,591
Undrawn commitments (1,503) - - (1,503)
Due from Banks 376 - - 376
Loans and advances (31,624) 4,284 37,039 9,699
 At 31 December 2020 (18,160) 4,284 37,039 23,163 
13.   PERSONNEL EXPENSES
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Salaries and wage 129,231 128,518
Pension costs - (Defined contribution scheme to SSNIT) 14,225 12,889
Staff Provident Fund (Defined Contribution Scheme) 8,238 7,474
Staff fuel expenses 39,529 33,613
Medical expenses 9,472 6,566
Canteen expenses 10,690 8,042
Training expenses 738 452
Uniform                                                                                                                                                                                                              21,537 19,502
Other staff related costs* 16,621 16,412
250,281 233,467
*Other staff related costs comprise insurance expenses on personnel, discount on staff loans and others.The number of 
persons employed by the Bank at the year-end was 1,481(2020: 1,460).
14.   OTHER OPERATING EXPENSES
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Occupancy Cost 20,708 22,966
Auditors Remuneration 1100 1,511
Donations and Social Responsibility 1,094 4,02573         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 73Motor Vehicle Running Expenses 10,684 10,527
General and Administrative Expenses 39,460 31,243
Information Technology Expenses                                                                         58,183 49,231
Others* 23,481 18,593
154,710 138,096
Others* consist of deposit insurance premium and clearing house expenses
15.    DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Depreciation of Property, Plant and equipment 13,813 12,769
Amortisation of intangible 13,469 8,979
Depreciation of Right of use asset 39,664 39,808
66,946 61,556
16.   EARNINGS PER SHARE
Earnings per share is calculated by dividing the net profit attributable to equity holders of the Bank by the weighted 
average number of equity shares in issue during the year.
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Profit after tax     81,602 65,403
Number of equity shares (‘000) 346,952 346,952
Weighted average number of shares (‘000) 346,952 346,952
Earnings per share:
Basic (GH¢)                                                                                                         0.2352 0.1885
Diluted (GH¢) 0.2352 0.1885
17.   CASH AND BANK BALANCE
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
(i)     Cash on hand 188,902 152,149
Balances with Bank of Ghana* 570,969 366,673
Nostro Balances** 65,670 107,571
Deposits and balances due from banking 
institution 99,078 129,363
Cash and bank balance 924,619 755,756
*Included in balances with bank of Ghana is mandatory reserve of GH¢ 394,197 (2020 GH¢ 342,482)
**Included in the Nostro balance is a restricted amount of GH¢ 11,833 (2020: GH¢ 28,537), these restricted Nostro 
amounts have been excluded from cash and cash equivalents in note 29.
18.   DUE FROM OTHER BANKS
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Placements with other banks 349,716 312,220
Less: Write off - -74         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 74Allowance for impairment losses (3,497) (3,122)
346,219 309,098
 The credit risk quality of due from other banks is disclosed 19.
19.1    CREDIT RISK QUALITY OF DUE FROM BANKS BALANCES
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk based on the Bank’s internal credit 
rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of impairment allowances.
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Performing
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 349,716 - - 349,716
Grade 4-5 - - - -
Non-performing - - - -
Grade 6: - - - -
Grade 7 - - - -
Grade 8  -  -  -  -
At 31 December 2021 349,716  -  - 349,716
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Performing - - - -
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 312,220 - - 312,220
Grade 4-5 - - - -
Non-performing - - - -
Grade 6: - - - -
Grade 7 - - - -
Grade 8 - - - -
At 31 December 2020 312,220 - - 312,220
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to due from banks measured at amortised cost is,
as follows:
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021 312,220 -  - 312,220
New assets originated or purchased -   -  - -   
Interest accrued 37,496 37,496
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)-   - - -   
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 2 -   -   - -   
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2021 349,716 - - 349,716
 2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2020 274,642 - - 274,642
New assets originated or purchased - - - -
Interest accrued 37,578 - - 37,578
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)- - - -
Transfers to Stage 1 -  - - -75         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 75Transfers to Stage 2 - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2020 312,220 - - 312,220
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to due from banks is, as follows:
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2021 3,122 - - 3,122
New assets originated or purchased - - - -
Interest accrued 375 375
Transfers to Stage 1 -   - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 -   - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
Written off/ recovery - - - -
At 31 December 2021 3,496 - - 3,496
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2020 2,747 - - 2,747
New assets originated or purchased - - - -
Interest accrued 375 375
Transfers to Stage 1 -   - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 -   - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
Written off/ recovery - - - -
At 31 December 2020 3,122 - - 3,122
20.   INVESTMENT SECURITIES
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Treasury bills  (a)
14 Day Treasury Bills 198,891 359,992
56 Day Treasury Bills                                                                          - 305,280
91 Day Treasury Bills                                                                                                 - -
182 Day Treasury Bills 911,716 1,012,224
Treasury Notes 326,778 91,102
1,437,385 1,768,598
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Government bonds (b)
2-5-year fixed rate notes 804,320 294,541
Above 5 years fixed rate note 158,950 159,000
963,270 453,541
Maturing within 90 days of date of acquisition 198,891 665,273
Maturing between 90 days - 1 year of date of 
acquisition          1,238,494 1,103,325
Maturing within 1-5 years of date of acquisition 963,270 453,541
2,400,655 2,222,13976         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 76Government bonds as well as Treasury Bills are classified as financial assets at amortized cost as the business 
model is to hold the financial assets to collect contractual cash flows representing solely payments of principal 
and interest.
The average interest rate on treasury bills at 31 December 2021 was 12.11% (2020: 15.11%) and the rate for 
treasury bonds at 31 December 2021 was 24.75% (2020: 19.97%).
20.1.     CREDIT RISK QUALITY OF INVESTMENT SECURITIES (DEBT INSTRUMENT)
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk of investment Securities (Debt 
Instruments) measured at amortised cost based on the Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage 
classification. The amounts presented are gross of impairment allowances.
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 2,400,655 - - 2,400,655
Grade 4-5 - - - -
Grade 6 - - - -
Grade 7 - - - -
Grade 8 - - - -
At 31 December 2021 2,400,655 - - 2,400,655
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 2,223,189 - - 2,223,189  
Grade 4-5 - - - -
Grade 6: - - - -
Grade 7 - - - -
Grade 8 - - - -
At 31 December 2020 2,223,189 -  - 2,223,189
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to Debt instruments measured at amortised cost 
is, as follows:
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 20212,222,139 - - 2,222,139
New assets originated or purchased 10,067,285 - - 10,067,285
Interest accrued 371,433 - - 371,433
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(10,260,202) - - (10,260,202)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2021 2,400,655 - - 2,400,655
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 20201,522,828 - - 1,522,828
New assets originated or purchased 2,005,588 - - 2,005,588
Interest accrued 292,911 - - 292,911
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(1,599,187) - - (1,599,187)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -77         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 77Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2020 2,222,139 - - 2,222,139
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to Debt instruments measured at amortised cost 
is, as follows: 
Instruments under this category were issued by the central bank and government.
21.   LOANS AND ADVANCES TO CUSTOMERS
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢ ’000
Overdrafts 527,209 515,946
Loans 2,166,826 1,689,092
Lease receivable 51,352 113,326
Gross loans and advances 2,745,387 2,318,364
Provision for impaired loans and advances
- Specific (392,072) (348,497)
- Collective (71,003) (57,879)
2,282,312 1,911,988
The above constitute loans and advances to customers and staff.  
Staff loans amounted to GH¢ 69,302 (2020: GH¢93,404).
The investment in lease receivables is analyzed as follows:
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Less than 1 year 27,319 10,947
Between 1 year and 5 years 142,480 102,379
169,799 113,326
Key ratios on loans and advances
• The total impairment for the year represents 16.87%  of gross loans at the year-end (2020:17.53%)
• Loan loss provision ratio is  16.87% of gross advances (2020: 17.53%)
• Gross Non-performing loans ratio per Bank of Ghana requirement is 31.21% (2020:34.4%)
• Total gross non-performing loans is GHS 930,849  (this includes interest in suspense of GHS 236,080)
• Fifty (50) largest exposures (gross funded and non-funded) to total exposures is 51.56% (2020: 39.54%)
2021 2020
a) Analysis by maturity GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Maturing within one year                                                                     1,112,234 997,130
Between one to five years 1,394,146 890,098
More than five years 239,007 431,136
2,745,387 2,318,364
Impairment of loans and advances
2021 2020
At 1 January 406,376 448,122
Additional impairment charge during the year 64,490 9,699
Write off                                                                                                                                (7,791) (51,445)
463,075 406,37678         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 7821.1. Impairment allowance for loans and advances to customers measured at amortised cost
21.1.1 Expected credit losses on loans and advances
 The table below shows an analysis of the gross loans and advances based the class of financial assets.
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Agric Loans 337,316 24,257 189,776  551,349
Retail loans 596,871 9,904 105,976 712,751
Corporate loans 738,269 344,002 399,016 1,481,287
1,672,456 378,163 694,768 2,745,387
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Agric Loans 278,897 17,053 153,732 449,682
Retail loans 480,838 12,193 79,407 572,438
Corporate loans 702,798 105,531 487,915 1,296,244
1,462,533 134,777 721,054 2,318,364
The table below shows an analysis of the expected credit losses on loans and advances based the class of financial 
assets.
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Agric Loans 4,277 4,140 141,743 150,160
Retail loans 1,170 77 105,837 107,084
Corporate loans 15,137 46,202 144,492 205,831
20,584 50,419 392,072 463,075
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Agric Loans 4,907 2,773 87,803 95,483
Retail loans 2,555 322 79,446 82,323
Corporate loans 27,112 20,211 181,247 228,570
34,574 23,306 348,496 406,376
21.2 CREDIT RISK QUALITY OF LOANS AND ADVANCE
21.2.1   Agric loans
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk of Agric loans based on the 
Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of 
impairment allowances.
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 337,316 - - 337,316
Grade 4-5 - 24,257 - 24,257
Grade 6 - - 2,826 2,826
Grade 7 - - 1,530 1,530
Grade 8 - - 185,420 185,420
At 31 December 2021 337,316 24,257 189,777 551,34979         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 792020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 278,897 - - 278,897
Grade 4-5 - 17,053 - 17,053
Grade 6 - - 2,057 2,057
Grade 7 - - 2,894 2,894
Grade 8 - - 148,781 148,781
At 31 December 2020 278,897 17,053 153,732 449,682
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to Agric loan is as follows:
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3   Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2021278,897 17,053 153,732 449,682
New assets originated or purchased 109,851 -                 -   109,851
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(8,184) -                 - (8,184)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 2 (43,249) 19,104 24,145 -   
Transfers to Stage 3 - (11,900) 11,900 -   
Amount written off - - - -
At 31 December 2021 337,315 24,257 189,777 551,349
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2020265,187 7,249 233,617 506,053 
New assets originated or purchased 39,321 -   -   39,321 
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(25,611) 9,804 (57,400) (73,207)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 2 - -   - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -   
Amount written off -   -   (22,485) (22,485)
At 31 December 2020 278,897 17,053 153,732 449,682
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to Agric loan is, as follows:
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 20214,907 2,773 87,804 95,484
New assets originated or purchased 1,248 - - 1,248
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(235)                         - - (235) 
Impact on Expected Credit loss - - 25,829 25,829
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 2 (1,643) 3,764 20,234 22,355   
Transfers to Stage 3 - (2,397) 7,876 5,479   
Loan Written off - - - -
At 31 December 2021 4,277 4,140 141,743 150,16080         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 802020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3   Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 20204,465 1,802 100,357 106,624
New assets originated or purchased 577 558 - 1,135
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(389) - (13,802) (14,191)
Re -measurement of loss allowance 254 413 1,248 1,915
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -   
Loan Written off - - - -
At 31 December 2020 4,907 2,773 87,803 95,483
21.2.2  Corporate loans
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk of Corporate loans based on 
the Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of 
impairment allowances.
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 738,269 - - 738,269
Grade 4-5 - 344,002 - 344,002
Grade 6: - - 34,238 34,238
Grade 7 - - 99,679 99,679
Grade 8  -  - 265,099 265,099
At 31 December 2021 738,269 344,002 399,016 1,481,287
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 762,212 - - 762,212
Grade 4-5 - 105,532 - 105,532
Grade 6: - - 68,441 68,441
Grade 7 - - 86,664 86,664
Grade 8 - - 273,395 273,395
At 31 December 2020 762,212 105,532 428,500 1,296,244
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to Corporate loan is, as follows:
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2021702,798 105,532 487,915 1,296,245
New assets originated or purchased 297,912 -  - 297,912
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(23,971) - (81,108) (105,079)
Transfers to Stage 1 -   - -   -
Transfers to Stage 2 (238,470) 238,470 -   -
Transfers to Stage 3 -   - -   -
Amount written off - - (7,791) (7,791) 
At 31 December 2021 738,269 344,002 399,016 1,481,28781         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 812020  Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3  Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2020561,451 48,735 354,040 964,226
New assets originated or purchased 529,794  56,796  160,590 747,180
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(388,447) - - (388,447)
Transfers to Stage 1 -   -   -   -
Transfers to Stage 2 -   -   -   -
Transfers to Stage 3 -   -   - -
Amount written off - - (26,715) (26,715)
At 31 December 2020 702,798 105,531 487,915 1,296,244
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to Corporate loan is, as follows:
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 202127,112 20,211 181,247 228,570
New assets originated or purchased 4,674 -   -   4,674
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)                       
(13,419)- (28,964) (42,383 )
Re -measurement of loss allowance -   -   -   -   
Transfers to Stage 1 -   -   
Transfers to Stage 2 (3,230) 25,991   -   22,761  
Transfers to Stage 3 -   -   -   -   
Loan Written off - - (7,791) (7,791)
At 31 December 2021 15,137 46,202 144,492 205,831
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 202034,458 15,636 191,218 241,312
New assets originated or purchased  14,686  2,462  5,225 22,373
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(37,596) - -           (37,596)
Impact on Expected Credit loss 15,564 2,113 11,519 29,196
Transfers to Stage 1 -   -   -   -   
Transfers to Stage 2 -   -   -   -   
Transfers to Stage 3 -   -   -   -   
Loan Written off -   -   (26,715) (26,715)
At 31 December 2020 27,112 20,211 181,247 228,570
21.2.3   Retail loans
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk of Retail loans based on 
the Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of 
impairment allowances.
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 596,871 - - 596,871
Grade 4-5 - 9,904 - 9,904
Grade 6 - - 4,354 4,354
Grade 7 - - 807 80782         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 82Grade 8 - - 100,815 100,815
At 31 December 2021 596,871 9,904 105,976 712,751
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 480,838 - - 480,838
Grade 4-5 - 12,193 - 12,193
Grade 6 - - 12,619 12,619
Grade 7 - - 2,657 2,657
Grade 8 - - 64,131 64,131
At 31 December 2020 480,838 12,193 79,407 572,438
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to Retail loan is, as follows:
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2021480,838 12,193 79,408 572,439
New assets originated or purchased 372,502 -                 - 372,502
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(229,901) (2,289) -                     (232,190)
Transfers to Stage 1 -   -   -   -   
Transfers to Stage 2 - -   -   -   
Transfers to Stage 3 (26,568)   -   26,568   -   
Amount written off - - - -
At 31 December 2021 596,871 9,904 105,976 712,751
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2020312,670 15,714 118,111 446,495
New assets originated or purchased 342,573 - - 342,573
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(174,405) (3,521) (36,459) (214,385)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
Amount written off - - (2,245) (2,245)
At 31 December 2020 480,838 12,193 79,407 572,438
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to Retail loan is, as follows:
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 20212,555 322 79,447 82,324
New assets originated or purchased 713 -   -   713
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(1,964) (245) -                      (2,209)
Impact on Expected Credit loss -   -   -   -
Transfers to Stage 1 -   -   -   -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 (134)    -   26,390   26,256
Loan Written off - - - - 
At 31 December 2021 1,170 77 105,837 107,08483         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 832020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 202010,058 1,583 88,546 100,187 
New assets originated or purchased 13,839 -   -   13,839
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(33,973) (2,025) (15,175) (51,223)
Re-measurement of loss allowance 12,631   764 8,320 21,715
Transfers to Stage 1 -   -   -   -   
Transfers to Stage 2 -   - -   -   
Transfers to Stage 3 -   -   -   -   
Loan Written off - - (2,245) (2,245)
At 31 December 2020 2,555 322 79,446 82,323
22.    INVESTMENT (OTHER THAN SECURITIES): FAIR VALUE THROUGH OCI
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢ ’000
At 1 January                                                        91,892 102,322
Exchange difference                                        (6) 20
Fair value adjustments (note 38) 8,040 (10,450)
At 31 December 99,926 91,892
Investment (other than securities)
InstitutionBalance as
at 2020Fair value 
movement Market value 
as at 2021
Ghana International Bank Limited 70,170 9,672 79,842 
Agridev Real Estates Limited 20,843 (1,632) 19,211 
Cocoa Processing Company 33 -   33 
Ghana Textile Manufacturing Company 544 -   544 
SDC Finance Limited 137 -   137 
Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial 
Telecommunication (SWIFT)  165 (6)   159 
TOTAL 91,892 8,040 99,926 
Breach in investment holding limits
The Bank’s holdings in four (4) non-subsidiary institutions (in the table below) are in breach of section 73(3) which states 
that “Bank or Specialised Deposit-taking Institution shall not invest or hold investments in the share capital of a body 
corporate other than a subsidiary of the bank or specialized deposit-taking institution that represents more than five 
percent interest in the body corporate”.
 The bank’s in Ghana International Bank Limited is also in breach of section 73(1) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-
taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act, 930), which state that “Bank or Specialised Deposit-taking Institution shall not invest 
or hold investments in the share capital of a body corporate other than a subsidiary of the bank or specialized deposit-
taking institution if the amount of investment exceeds ten percent of the net own funds of the bank or specialized 
deposit-taking institution.”  
Institution % Holding
Ghana International Bank Limited 9%
Agridev Real Estates Limited 10%
Metro Mass Transportation Ltd 16%
Activity Venture Finance Company 20%84         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 8423.   INVESTMENT IN ASSOCIATE COMPANIES
The Bank has one associate, Activity Venture Finance Company (AVF) that is immaterial to the Bank, which is 
equity accounted for.
Activity Venture Finance Co
The relationship with the Bank To help start-ups with high potential and risk
Principal place of business/country of incorporation Accra, Ghana
Ownership interest/voting rights 20%/20%
Fair value of ownership interest (if listed) N/A
The entity has been dormant for the past 60 months, the investment has been fully impaired.
24.   INCOME TAX
24.1   INCOME TAX EXPENSE RECOGNISED IN PROFIT OR LOSS
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Current year income tax – 58,563 14,538
Deferred tax (14,068) 17,748
44,495 32,286
24.2   CORPORATION TAX ASSET
Income tax GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 
Up to 2020 (5,161)  -   -   (5,161)  
2021 - (14,129) 45,953 31,824 
(5,161) (14,129) 45,953 26,663 
National Stabilization Levy/
Financial Recovery Levy2,764 (6,76 4) 12,610 8,610
Total tax (2,397) (20,893) 58,563 35,273 
24.3   EFFECTIVE TAX RECONCILIATION
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Profit before tax 126,097 97,690 
Income tax using domestic tax rate (25%) 31,525 24,422 
Non-deductible expenses *  638 26,841 
Tax on exempt income - (35,054)
Income subjected to tax at a different rate @20% (278) (63)
Allowable expenses (not through P&L) -                         (6,492)
National fiscal stabilization levy 12,610 4,884 
Deferred tax - 17,748
44,495 32,286 
Effective tax rate 35.3% 33.0%
*Non-deductible expenses includes fines and penalties disallowed for tax purpose
24.4   DEFERRED TAX ASSET
The following table shows deferred tax recorded in the statement of financial position85         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 85Deferred tax assetsAs at 1 
January 2021Income 
statementOCIAs at 31 
December 
2021
 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 
Property, plant and equipment (16,982) (107) - (17,089)
Impairment allowance for loans and advances 78,178 14,175 - 92,353
Investment (other than securities) (17,442) - (2,010) (19,452)
Balance 31 December 43,754 14,068 (2,010) 55,812
Deferred tax assets As at 1 
January 
2020Income 
statementOCIAs at 31 
December 
2020
 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 
Property, equipment, and intangible assets (15,892)  (1,090) (16,982)
Impairment allowance for loans and        
advances94,836  (16,658) - 78,178
Investment (other than securities) (20,055)  -   2,613 (17,442)
Balance 31 December 58,889 (17,748) 2,613 43,754
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Balance at 1 January 43,754 58,890
Charged to profit or loss 14,068 (17,748)
Charged to OCI (2,010)  2,613 
Balance 31 December 55,812 43,754
25.     INTANGIBLE ASSETS
2021 Software Work In-Progress Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost
At 1 January 2021 90,549 -   90,549
Acquisitions  2 2,762 2,764
Transfers from Plant, property and equipment - 1,036 1,036
Transfers from work in progress 3,570 (3,570) -
94,122 228 94,350
Amortisation
At 1 January 2021 52,848 -   52,848
Charge for the year 13,469 -   13,469
At 31 December 2021 66,318 -   66,318
Net Book Value
At 31 December 2021 27,804 228 28,032
2020 Software Work In-Progress Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost
At 1 January 2020 64,667 - 64,66786         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 86Acquisitions 153 25,729 25,882
Transfer 25,729 (25,729) -
90,549 - 90,549
Accumulated amortization
At 1 January 2020 43,869 - 43,869
Charge for the year 8,979 - 8,979
At 31 December 2020 52,848 - 52,848
Net Book Value
At 31 December 2020 37,701 - 37,701
Work-in-progress
• Work-in-progress at the end of the year.GHS 228 (2020: nil)  
• No impairment losses on intangible assets were recognized during the year (2020: Nil)
• There were no capitalized borrowing costs related to intangible assets during the year (2020: Nil)
• There were no restrictions on title and intangible assets pledged as security for liabilities during the year 
(2020:Nil)
26.   OTHER ASSETS
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Advance payment 65 662 
Pre payments 12,472 11,902 
Sundry receivables * 14,320 27,590 
L e a s e  d e p o s i t s  f r o m  A g r i d e v                                                                                                        20,138 19,313 
Others**                                                                                                                                             5,259 2,275
31-Dec 52,254 61,742
Current 39,577 50,282
Non-current 12,677 11,460
52,254 61,742
*Sundry receivables are carried at amortised cost, expected credit loss for these instruments were assessed to be    
insignificant.
**Others represent reimbursable from money transfer counterparties and stationery stock.
27.   PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
2021Land & 
BuildingComputersFurniture & 
EquipmentMotor   
VehiclesCapital 
W I P Leasehold 
ImprovementTotal
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost/Valuation 
At 1 January 2021 93,399 33,570 23,759 7,811 5,771 30,969 195,279 
Additions 14 1,729 5,900 -   25,020 126 32,789 
Disposal -   (1,423) (907) (45) -   -   (2,375)
Transfers from WIP 141 1,876 210 4,709 (10,474) 3,538 -   
Transfers to Intangible -   -   -   -   (1,036) -   (1,036)
At 31 December 2021 93,554 35,752 28,962 12,475 19,281 34,633 224,657
Accumulated 
Depreciation
At 1 January 2021 24,593 25,422 17,108 6,671 -   25,685 99,479 
Charge for the year 4,557 2,559 2,936 1,412 -   2,349 13,813 
Disposal -   (1,422) (902) (45) -   -   (2,370)
Write Offs - -   -   -   -   -   -   
At 31 December 2021 29,150 26,559 19,141 8,038 - 28,034 110,92287         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 87Net Book Value
At 31 December 2021 64,404 9,193 9,820 4,437 19,281 6,599 113,735
2020Land & 
BuildingComputersFurniture & 
EquipmentMotor   
VehiclesCapital
W I PLeasehold 
ImprovementTotal
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost/Valuation 
At 1 January 2020 93,221 29,812 20,783 7,745 2,225 28,714 182,500
Additions 21 1,659 2,470 - 8,504 97 12,751
Disposal  -   28 - - - - 28
Transfers 157 2,071 506 66 (4,958) 2,158 -
At 31 December 2020 93,399 33,570 23,759 7,811 5,771 30,969 195,279
Accumulated 
Depreciation
At 1 January 2020 20,042 23,395 14,615 5,358 - 23,328 86,738
Charge for the year 4,551 2,055 2,493 1,313 - 2,357 12,769
Disposal  -   (28)  -    -   -    -   (28)
At 31 December 2020 24,593 25,422 17,108 6,671 - 25,685 99,479
Net Book Value
At 31 December 2020 68,806 8,148 6,651 1,140 5,771 5,284 95,800
Cost component of revalued property
If the land and buildings were stated on a historical cost basis, the amounts would have been as follows:
               2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost 13,052 13,001
Accumulated depreciation (4,267) (3,614)
8,785 9,387
Disposal Schedule
Cost and Accumulated depreciation
The cost and accumulated depreciation of assets disposed is made up of cost of disposals and write-offs and 
their corresponding accumulated depreciation.
2021 Computers Furniture & Equipment Motor & Vehicle Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost 1,423 907 45 2,375
Accumulated depreciation (1,422) (903) (45) (2,369)
Net book value 1 5 - 6
Proceeds - 260 10 270
Gain/(Loss) on disposal (1) 255 10 264
2020 Computers Motor & Vehicle Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost 28 - 28
Accumulated depreciation (28) - (28)
Net book value - - -
Proceeds - - -
Profit/Loss on disposal - - -
None of the property,plant and equipment of the Bank had been pledged as security for liabilities and there were 
no restrictions on the title of any of the Bank’s property and equipment at the reporting date and at the end of 
the previous year. Capital commitments not provided for in the financial statements as at 31 December 2021 
was nil. (2020: Nil).88         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 8828.       RIGHT OF USE ASSETS
The Bank leases land and buildings. Information about leases for which the Company is a lessee is presented 
below.
2021 Rental space Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost/Valuation 
At 1 January 2021 255,276 255,276
Additions 6,694 6,694
Termination of lease - -
At 31 December 2021 261,970 261,970
Depreciation
At 1 January 2021 71,751 71,751
Charge for the year 39,664 39,664
At 31 December 2021 111,415 111,415
Net Book Value
At 31 December 2021                                150,555 150,555
2020 Rental space Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost/Valuation 
At 1 January 2020 68,351 68,351
Additions 186,925 186,925
At 31 December 2020 255,276 255,276
Depreciation
At 1 January 2020 31943 31,943
Charge for the year 39,808 39,808
Termination of lease - -
At 31 December 2020 71,751 71,751
Net Book Value
At 31 December 2020                                183,525 183,525
29.   CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’ 000
Cash 188,902 152,149
Bank Balance 723,884 575,072
14-Day/91-Day Treasury Bill 198,891 665,272
Cash and cash equivalent in statement of cash flows 1,111,677 1,392,493
Included in the cash and cash equivalent is an amount of GH¢ 198,891 (2020: 665,272) which has been 
disclosed as part of Investments Securities in Note 20.
Included in the bank balances above is a mandatory reserve deposits of GH¢394,197 (2020: GH¢357,000) with 
Bank of Ghana representing 8% the Bank’s total deposits.
30.   BORROWED FUNDS
               2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Government of Ghana 65,324 65,440
Central Bank of Ghana 19,311 11,98889         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 89Other Financial Institutions 38,182 46,673
AFD/Rubber Phase IV and V 171,742 189,072
Total 294,559 313,173
2021Government 
of GhanaCentral 
BankFinancial 
InstitutionsAFD/Rubber 
Phase IV&VTotal
Balance as at 1 January 2021 65,440 11,988 46,673 189,072 313,173
Additions 908 6,333 606,004 5,519 618,764
Interest 1,965 990 800 58 3,813
Payment (2,989) - (615,295) (22,907) (641,191)
Balance as at 31 December 2021 65,324 19,311 38,182 171,742 294,559
2020Government of 
GhanaCentral 
BankFinancial 
InstitutionsAFD/Rubber 
Phase IV&VTotal
Balance as at 1 January 2020 65,720 11,668 39,235 160,995 277,618
Additions 1,170 132 137,586 31,059 169,947
Interest 1,782 344 313 425.16 2,864
Payment (3,232) (156) (130,461)  (3,407) (137,256)
Balance as at 31 December 2020 65,440 11,988 46,673 189,072 313,173
30.a.   Government of Ghana  
This consists of multiple facilities granted to the Bank to finance food crops, non-traditional exports, agro industry 
as well as institutional support. Interest rates range from 1.8% - 5% with maturities ranging from 2018 to 2051. The 
disclosure is based on the specific project the loan was meant for .
Details of these borrowings are shown below: 
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
ADF Projects 46,510 44,523
EDAIF 3,600 6,471
AFD/MOFA 14,246 13,502
AfDB/KP.IRR. Projects 968 944
65,324 65,440
30.b     Central Bank
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
IFAD SCIMP 1,839 1,720 
IDA/BADEA 1,807 1,724 
SMALL SCALE IRR.DEV PROJECTS 664 653 
CFD Loan to GREL 373 364 
IFAD/MEST Rural Ent. 534 534 
IFAD /UWADEP 602 563 
ADB/BADEA/BOVID 7,134 6,429 
OVCF 6,357 -
19,310 11,988 
30.c     Financial institutions
These borrowings are for liquidity management purposes. Interest rate ranges from 15% to 16.5% and maturity is 
usually within one year.
Details of the borrowings from financial institutions are shown below:90         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 902021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
EXIMBANK 20,980  - 
First Banc -   1,095 
CIDAN Investment -   2,439 
GHIB 17,201 43,139
38,181 46,673
30.d        Others
AFD - The general purpose of the credit facility is to finance long term loans dedicated to the Rubber Out 
grower Plantation Programme (ROPP).  Average Interest is at a rate of 2.07% maturing in 2027.
Details of other borrowings are shown below:
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
AFD/Rubber Phase IV 171,742 189,072
31.   DEPOSITS FROM CUSTOMERS
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Savings Deposits 751,256 704,128 
Demand and Call Deposits 3,537,070 3,163,107 
Fixed/Time Deposits 638,890 413,802 
4,927,216 4,281,037
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Customer deposits
Maturity analysis of customer deposits
From Government and Parastatals:
Payable within 90 days 535,098 274,063
Payable after 90 days and within one year                                          258,944 188,468
794,042 462,531
From Private Sector and individuals:
Payable within 90 days 2,386,409 1,997,856
Payable after 90 days and within one-year 1,746,765 1,820,650
4,133,174 3,818,506
4,927,216 4,281,037
Twenty largest depositors to total deposit ratio is 19.47% (2020: 23.52%)
32.   OTHER LIABILITIES
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Expected Credit losses on contingent liabilities 1,728 24,811 
Managed funds 9,846 5,356 
Payables 52,697 23,397 
Provident fund 3,126 2,912 
Statutory Deductions 1,694 7,243 
Visa and Point of sales settlement 8,460 10,100 
Accruals 15,062 13,305 91         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 91Staff long service awards (i) 3,383 2,013
95,996 89,137
Current 21,100 49,243
Non-current 74,896 39,894
Payables* consist of Payment orders and unclaimed credit items.
Accruals** comprise unpaid maintenance and utility expenses
i.       Movement in the liability for staff long service awards
The Bank has a long service award for its employees.  These are long service awards which accrue to employees 
based on graduated periods of uninterrupted service.  These awards accrue over the service life of employees. 
Employees leaving the service of the Bank after 5 years through retirement (both voluntary and compulsory) 
or resignation become eligible for these awards based on their current entitlement at the time of retirement or 
resignation based on their length of service. The bank has no further obligations once the staff leaves employment.
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Liability for staff awards at 1 January 2013 2,060
Benefits paid by the plan (113) (124)
Past service cost 1,319 (405)
Expenses recognised in profit or loss* 164 482
Liability for staff awards at 31 December 3,383 2,013
2021 2020
Expenses recognised in profit and loss GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Current Service Cost                                                              132 391
Interest Cost                                                      32 91
                                                                                     164 482
Actuarial assumptions
The following are the principal assumptions at the reporting date.
Discount rate 21.01% 19.1%
General inflation rate 9.28% 10.4%
Assumptions regarding future mortality rates are based on published statistics and mortality tables. 
33.   LEASE LIABILITY   
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
As at 1 January 181,824 34,205 
Additions 1,498 169,917 
Accretion of interest 7,724 11,988 
Exchange difference 5,907 374 
Payments (34,133) (34,660)
As at 31 December 162,820 181,824
The Bank’s total cash outflows with regard to leases liabilities is GH¢34,133 (2020: GH¢34,660).  
Future minimum lease payments under non–cancellable operating leases as at 31 December were as follows :
Maturity analysis of lease liability 2021 2020
GHS’000 GHS’000
Within one year 33,984 39,070
After one year but not more than five years 144,648 166,61992         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 92More than five years  - 100,200
Total 178,632 305,889
34.   STATED CAPITAL
Reconciliation
2021 2020
No. of Shares Proceeds No. of Shares Proceeds
Authorized:  GH¢’000  GH¢’000 
Balance as at 1 January 261,721,483 421,700 261,721,483 421,700 
Issued Shares 85,230,770 277,000 85,230,770 277,000
Balance as at 31 December 346,952,253 698,700 346,952,253 698,700 
35.       ACCUMULATED LOSSES
2021 2020
GH¢’000  GH¢’000 
At 1 January (252,236) (289,349)
Transfer to credit risk reserve (25,210) 4,739
Transfer to statutory reserve (40,801) (32,702)
Transaction cost related to right issue                                                                                                                                  - (327)
Profit for the year 81,602 65,403
TOTAL (236,645) (252,236)
36.       REVALUATION RESREVE
This reserve comprises the cumulative net change in the fair value of property and equipment. 
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
At 1 January 57,531 57,531
Movement - -
At 31 December 57,531 57,531
37.       STATUTORY RESERVE
Statutory reserve represents cumulative amounts set aside from annual profits after tax required under section 
34(i) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit–Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).  The proportion of net profits 
transferred to reserves ranges from 12.5% to 50% of net profit after tax, depending on the relationship that the 
balance on statutory reserves bears to paid up capital.
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
At 1 January 141,214 108,512
Transfer from Retained earnings 40,801 32,702
At 31 December 182,015 141,214
38.       CREDIT RISK RESERVE
The credit risk reserve is a non-distributable reserve required by Bank of Ghana to account for difference 
between impairment loss on financial assets as per IFRS and the specific and the general impairment loss on 
loans and advances and contingent liabilities per the Central Bank’ s prudential guidelines.
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
At 1 January 153,088 157,827
Transfer (to)/from Retained earnings 25,210 (4,739)
At 31 December 178,298 153,08893         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 93Reconciliation between Bank of Ghana impairment allowance and IFRS impairment
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
 
Bank of Ghana impairment allowance for loans and advances                               641,373 559,464
IFRS Impairment for loans and advances at 31 December                                   (463,075) (406,376)
Credit risk reserve at 31 December 178,298 153,08894         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 9439.          FAIR VALUE THROUGH OCI
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
At 1 January 52,326 60,163
Fair value adjustment, net of tax (Note 38ii) 6,030 (7837)
At 31 December 58,356 52,326
ii. The Fair Value Reserves includes the cumulative change in the Fair Value of equity investments until the 
investment is derecognized or impaired.  Fair value through other comprehensive income net of tax is made up 
of:
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Investment (other than securities) 8,040 (10,450)
Deferred Tax                                                                                                                              (2,010) 2,613 
Total 6,030 (7,837)
40.         CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS INCLUDING OFF BALANCE SHEET ITEMS
In common with other banks, the Bank conducts business involving acceptances, guarantees, performances 
and indemnities.  The majority of these facilities are offset by corresponding obligations of third parties. The 
Bank also holds certain securities in its own name on behalf of customers.  The values of these securities are 
not recognized in the statement of financial position.
Letters of credit commit the Bank to make payments to third parties, on production of documents, which are 
subsequently reimbursed by customers.
Guarantees are generally written by a bank to support performance by a customer to third parties. The Bank will 
only be required to meet these obligations in the event of customer ’s default.
Contingencies and commitments in the financial statements as at 31 December 2021 in respect of the above 
amounted to GH¢ 140,982 (2020: GH¢298,111), as detailed below:
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’00
Guarantees and indemnities 33,702 244,331
Undrawn Overdraft 33,546 56,641
Letters of credit 107,279 53,780
174,527 354,752
40.1     CREDIT RISK QUALITY OF LETTER OF CREDIT, COMMITMENTS AND GUARANTEES
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk of credit, commitments and 
guarantees based on the Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts 
presented are gross of impairment allowances.
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 140,825 - - 140,825
Grade 4-5 33,702 - - 33,702
Grade 6: - - - -
Grade 7 - - - -
Grade 8 - - - -
At 31 December 2020 174,527, - - 174,527
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 110,421 - - 110,42195         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 95Grade 4-5 244,331 - - 244,331
Grade 6: - - - -
Grade 7 - - - -
Grade 8 - - - -
At 31 December 2020 354,752 - - 354,752
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to credit, commitments and guarantees 
is as follows:
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 
January 2021354,752 - - 354,752
New assets originated or 
purchased- - - -   
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(180,225) - - (180,225)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2021 174,527 - - 174,527
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3   Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 
January 2020367,101 - - 367,100
New assets originated or purchased 56,641 - - 56,641
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(68,990) - - (68,990)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2020 354,752 354,752
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to credit, commitments and guarantees is  as follows:
2021 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3   Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 
January 202124,811 - - 24,811
New assets originated or purchased - - - -
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)                       
(23,083)- - (23,083)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2021 1,728 - - 1,728
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3   Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 
January 202011,723 - - 11,723
New assets originated or purchased 13,088 - - 13,088
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs) -   - - -   96         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 96Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2020 24,811 - - 24,811
40.3.    CONTINGENT LIABILITY
Pending Legal Claims
At the year-end there were 14 (2020: 16) legal cases pending against the Bank. Should judgment go in favour 
of the plaintiffs, likely claims against the Bank have been estimated at GH¢3,821 (2020: GH¢ 1,277). A provision 
of Gh¢1,300 is held in the books.
40.3     CONTINGENT ASSET
At the reporting date, there were no contingent asset (2020: Nil)
41.       RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Parties are considered to be related if one party has the ability to control the other party or exercise significant 
influence over the other party in making financial or operating decisions, or one other party controls both. 
Shareholders of the entity are as follows:
Shareholders
Name of shareholder No. of shares in thousand Percentage holding (%)
Financial Investment Trust        222,218 64.05%
Government of Ghana                                                                               74,579 21.50%
Ghana Amalgamated Trust PLC 39,077 11.26%
Others                                                                                                                      11,078 3.19%
346,952 100%
At 31 December 2021 the following amounts related to transactions with the Government of Ghana
                                                                                                                           2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Government Securities 2,400,655 2,222,139
Loans and Advances 59,727 71,583
Borrowings 65,324 65,440
Others         11,395 30,973
Associated Company
The Bank provides general banking services to its associated company.  These transactions are conducted on 
similar terms to third-party transactions. There were no transactions with associated company during the period 
under consideration.
Details of investments in associated company are provided in Note 23.
Transactions with executive directors and key management personnel
Key management personnel are defined as those persons having authority and responsibility for planning, 
directing and controlling the activities of the Bank (directly or indirectly) and comprise the Directors and Senior 
Management of the Bank.
The Bank has advanced loans to some past directors as well as key management staff. No provisions have 
been made in respect of loans to the Executive Director or other members of key management personnel (or 
any connected person). 
Remuneration of Executive Directors and other key management personnel
The remuneration of executive directors and other key management personnel during the year were as follows:
Short term employee benefits 2021 2020
GH¢’000  GH¢’000
Salaries and other short-term benefits 16,681 15,950 
Social security contributions 1,145 1,641 
17,826 17,59197         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 97Remuneration of executive directors during the year amounted to GH¢ 1,447 (2020 GH¢1,453).
Details of transactions and balances between the Bank and Executive Directors and other key management 
personnel are as follows:
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Loans
Loans outstanding at 31 December 2,363 2,385
Interest income 124 80
Interest rates charged on loans to staff are below market rates.  These loans are secured over the assets 
financed of the respective borrowers.  These loans are fair valued at the year end. There were no loans to the 
Executive Director in the current year.
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Deposits 11,149 11,110
Key Management’s shareholding
  No. of shares % Holding
Key management 20,127 0.006
Transactions with companies in which a Director or other members of key management personnel is 
related 
The executive director is a non-executive board member of Ghana International Bank Plc (GIB).Details of 
transactions and balances between the Bank and GIB are as follows:
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Borrowings 17,201 42,930
Bank balance 14,705 52,364
Transactions with non- executive directors
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Directors’ remuneration
Fees and allowances for services as directors 1,740 1,693
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Deposits 11,149 11,110
Directors’ Shareholding 
At 31 December 2021, the past directors named below held shares in the Bank. 
Directors No. of shares % Holding
Nana Soglo Alloh IV 54,800 0.00016
Daniel Asiedu 2,000 0.000006
Dr. Adu Anane Antwi 800 -
57,600 0.000166
42.       DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLAN
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Pension scheme, the National Social Security Fund 14,225 12,889
Provident Fund 8,238 7,474
22,463 20,36398         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 9843.       ASSETS PLEDGED AS SECURITY
At 31 December 2021 the value of government securities pledged as collateral was GH¢ 13,500 (2020: NIL).
44.        COLLATERAL ACCEPTED AS SECURITY FOR ASSETS
At 31 December 2021 the value of government securities accepted as collateral that the Bank is permitted to sell 
or re-pledge in the event of default was GH¢ 70,200(2020: GH¢116,445).
These transactions are conducted under terms that are usual and customary to standard lending, and securities 
borrowings and lending activities.
45.       NATIONAL FISCAL STABILISATION LEVY AND FINANCIAL RECOVERY LEVY
The National Fiscal Stabilisation Levy Act 862, became effective from 12 July 2014. Under the Act, a 5% levy will 
be charged on profit before tax and is payable quarterly. 
The Financial recovery levy became effective from January, 2021. Under the Act, a 5% levy will be charged on 
profit before tax and is payable quarterly
46.       REGULATORY DISCLOSURES
i.           Non–Performing Loans Ratio
Percentage of gross non-performing loans (“substandard to loss”) to total credit/advances portfolio (gross): 
31.21% (2020: 34.40%).
ii.          Capital Requirement Directive (CRD)
The capital requirement directive at the end of December 2021 was calculated at approximately 14.49% (2020: 
14.87%).
iii.          Liquid Ratio
Percentage of liquid assets to volatile liabilities: 101.87% (2020: 117.76%).
47.       SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
There were no material significant events after the reporting date that require disclosure in or adjustment to the 
financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2021. 
48        Adjustment for non-cash items
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Depreciation and amortization 66,946 61,556 
Impairment charge on financial assets 41,781 23,163 
Dividend received -   (186)
(Gain)/loss on disposal of property and equipment (264) -   
Net interest income (480,326) (415,413)
(371,863) (330,880)
48.1 Changes in operating assets and liabilities
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Loans & advances (420,232) (445,674)
Other assets 9,490 5,635 
Deposits from customers 642,739 890,656 
Restricted cash 16,704 (7,537)99         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 99Other liabilities 29,942 (4,193)
278,643 438,887
49. Default in statutory requirements and accompanying sanctions:
For the period under review, the bank did not record any statutory liquidity breaches and therefore did not incur 
any sanctions.
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
(i) Sanctions (GHS'000) - - 
(ii) Default in statutory liquidity - - 
 Other regulatory breaches (including onsite examination)
2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
(i) Sanctions (GHS'000) 374 24 
(ii)  Number of breaches 1 2100         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 1002120
APPENDIX I
Value Added Statement 2021 2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Interest earned and other operating income 885,429 769,156 
Direct cost of services (412,736) (363,804)
Value added by banking services 472,693 405,352 
Non-banking income 12,412 10,533 
Impairment (41,781) (23,163)
Value Added 443,324 392,722 
Distributed as follows:
To employees:
Directors (without executives) (1,740) (1,693)
Executive Directors 1,447 1,454 
Other employees (249,988) (233,236)
(250,281) (233,475)
To Government:
Income tax (44,494) (32,286)
To providers of capital
Dividends to shareholders - - 
To expansion and growth:
Depreciation (53,477) (52,577)
Amortization (13,469) (8,979)
(66,946) (61,556)
Profit for the period 81,602 65,403 101         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 101Shareholders’ Information - Unaudited Number of Shareholders
The Bank had 446 equity shareholders at 31 December 2021 distributed as follows:
No. of No of % of shares
Category shareholders shares held
1-1,000 419 114,937 0.03
1,001-5,000 24 49,606 0.01
5,001-10,000 3 23,560 0.01
Above 10,000 13 346,764,150 99.95
Total 459 346,952,253 100.00
20 Largest Shareholders
Control rights: Each share is entitled to the same voting rights.
No. NAMENO. OF 
SHARES % 
1 FINANCIAL INVESTMENT TRUST 222,218,113 64.05
2 GOVERNMENT OF GHANA 74,579,327 21.50
3 GHANA AMALGAMATED TRUST PLC 39,076,924 11.26
4 ESOP 5,983,828 1.72
5 DOE, OSCAR YAO O. Y. D. 2,595,181 0.75
6 COFIE, MARK BLEWUNYO KODJO M. B. K. C. 2,100,629 0.61
7 NANA, SOGLO ALLOH IV 54,800 0.02
8  PARACELSUS PHARMACY & MARKETING  
CONSULTANCY LTD,  P. P. M. C. L.50,000 0.01
9 DOE, OSCAR YAO O. Y. D. 36,500 0.01
10 BONDZI-SIMPSON, LESLIE 26,600 0.01
11 MR, JOHN BEKUIN-WURAPA 20,000 0.01
12 GOGO, BENJAMIN AKUETE 12,000 0.00
13 LAING, ARCHIBALD FERGUSON 10,248 0.00
14ARMAH-MENSAH, 
EDWARD IAN NII AYITEY E. I. N. A. A.10,000 0.00
15 FIADJOE, ABLA GRACE A. G. F. 7,500 0.00
16 MARY EMMELINE SAAH,  M. E. S 6,060 0.00
17 MR, ISAIAH OFFEI-DARKO 5,000 0.00
18 DUAH, EUGENE KWAKU 4,500 0.00
19 ODAME, DESMOND YAW DYO 3,424 0.00
20 OFFEI-DARKO, ISAIAH 2,500 0.00
SUB TOTAL of TOP 20 346,803,134 99.96
Others 149,119 0.04
346,952,253 100.002120
APPENDIX II102         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 102
103         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 1032120ABOUT US
AGRIBUSINESS  
• Sector Loans
• Working Capital Loans
• Asset Finance 
• Trade Finance (Export & Import)
• Group Loans 
• Lines of Credit 
• Managed Fund 
• Nucleus-Outgrower schemes 
• Guarantees 
• Institutionally Managed Farmers loans
• Agric Value Chain Financing
CORPORATE & COMMERCIAL BANKING
• Foreign Currency Account
• Schools and Colleges Account
• Business Overdraft
• Project Account
• Guarantees
• IPC Discounting Loans
• Current and Call Accounts
• Term Loans
LEASE & ASSET FINANCE
• Fleet Finance 
• Equipment Lease 
• Asset Re-Lease (Sale and Lease back) 
• Household Asset Finance 
• Private Equipment Finance 
• Agri-Lease 
• Gold Drive Plus
TRADE SERVICES
• Advance Payments
• Import Letters of Credit
• Import Bills for Collection
• Export Letters of Credit
• Export Bills for Collection
ADB BANCASSURANCE • INSURANCE 
• Abusua Anidaso (Life and Funeral Policy)
• ADB Motor Insurance
MONEY TRANSFER
• Western Union 
• MoneyGram 
• Ria Money 
• Unity Link 
• Transfast 
• Instant Money 
• Zeepay 
CONSUMER BANKING
• Current Account 
• Savings Deposit Account • Hybrid (Cedi) Current Account 
• Local Transfer Payment 
• Salary Account 
• Personal Loans 
• Personal Investment Plus (PIP)
• Controller (CAGD) Loans
• Pay Day Plus
• Mmofra Account
• Home-link Account 
• ADB Collabo/Collasave 
• Foreign Currency Account 
• Foreign Exchange Account
• Adwadifo Anidaso
• Institutionally Managed Personal Loans (IMPL) 
TREASURY MANAGEMENT
• Fixed (Cedi) Deposit Account
• Fixed Deposit Foreign Currency (USD, GBP & EUR)
• Primary Dealer in BOG/GOG Treasury Bill/Notes/Bonds
• Foreign Currency Deposits
• Cash Management
• International Transfers using the SWIFT System
• Foreign Exchange – Buying and Selling
• Custody Services
E-BUSINESS
• ADB Collections Solutions
• ADB Payments Solutions
• ADB Internet Banking (QuicNet)
• ADB Merchant Acquiring (POS & E-Commerce)
• GhQR  
• ADB USSD *767#
• ADB Alert Services (Quic Alert)
• ADB Visa Cards (Debit & Prepaid)
• Ezwich
• GH Link
• ADB Mobile Banking Application
• ADB Bill Payments (DSTV, GOtv, ECG & Passport)
• ADB Online Payment Solutions
• ATM Services
PARASTATALS AND INSTITUTIONAL BANKING
• Government Institutions
• Ministries
• Department
• Agencies
• Strategic Banking Partnership with Corporate Institutions
• Revenue Collections
• Investment Services
• Transactional Services
EXECUTIVE BANKINGOUR BANKING SERVICES104         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 104
105         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 1052120
ACCRA WEST
Dansoman
Abeka Lapaz
Weija
Kaneshie
Bukom
Madina
Gulf House
Achimota
Kasoa
Wisconsin University
University of Ghana, Legon
Telephone: 0202506203 ext 204/205 
030- 2506201, 2506202, 2506203
ACCRA EAST
Tema Main
Tema Meridian
Spintex
Teshie
Nungua
Tema East
Tema Mankoadze
Labone Junction
Osu
Adabraka
Accra Newtown
Nima
Ring Road Central
Makola
ADB House
Ridge
Diamond House
Telephone: 030- 3216100, 3204305,
3203371, 3206396, 0244477927
CENTRAL/WESTERN/ WESTERN NORTH 
Agona Swedru
Mankessim
Assin Fosu
Cape Coast
UCC
Takoradi
Takoradi Market Circle
Agona Nkwanta
Grel Apemanim
Sefwi Wiawso
Bonsu Nkwanta
Enchi
Sefwi Essam
Juaboso
Telephone: 03120 29068, 0246746962
BONO EAST / BONO / AHAFO ASHANTI
Sunyani
TechimanBerekum
Dormaa Ahenkro
Nkoranza
Atebubu
Kumasi Adum
Kumasi Market
Nhyiaeso
Ejisu
New Edubiase
Obuasi
Asante Bekwai
Kenyasi
Goaso
Kwapong
Prempeh II
Telephone: 032-204-5260
EASTERN / VOLTA / OTI
Koforidua
Nkawkaw
Suhum
Kade
Asiakwa
Ho
Hohoe
Kpando
Kpeve
Nkwanta
Denu
Sogakope
Juapong
Kpassa
Telephone: 036 - 2028250, 2028284, 2028289
034 - 2022292, 2022739
UPPER EAST / UPPER WEST
NORTHERN / SAVANNAH
NORTH EAST
Bolgatanga
Bawku
Navrongo
Walewale
Wa
Tumu
Bole
Tamale Main
Tamale Aboabo
Kaladan
Yendi
Savelugu
Buipe
Telephone: 037- 2022629, 2022938,
2027339, 0243283898 ABOUT US
AREA OFFICES106         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 106
107         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 1072120ABOUT US
BRANCHES & AGENCIES
Greater-Accra Region
ABEKA LAPAZ BRANCH
Off George Bush N1 Highway, 
Near the Abrantie Spot
Tel: 030-7010373
GPS: GA-428-1771
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
ACCRA NEW TOWN BRANCH
Newtown Circle Road, Malam Atta 
Market in the Old Oxford Cinema 
Building
Tel: 030-2220989 / 0302-2220986  
GPS: GA-069-3525
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
ACHIMOTA BRANCH
Near Neoplan  Assembly Plant on the 
Achimota  Nsawam road
Tel: 030-2420038 / 030-2420036 
030-7002070
GPS: GE-373-1882
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
ADB HOUSE BRANCH
Independence Avenue after Latter 
Days Saints Church  
GPS: GA-030-6976
Tel: 030-7001997
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
DANSOMAN BRANCH
Near Dansoman Round-About, Off 
Dansoman High Street  GPS: GA-
537-1721 
Tel: 030-2312414 / 030-2311636
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
GULF HOUSE BRANCH
Main Gulf House Building on the 
Tetteh Quarshie – Legon Road.
Tel: 030 2506201 / 030 2506202
030 2506203    GPS: GA-289-5092
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
KANESHIE BRANCH
Near Kaneshie Market, Off the 
Winneba Road
Tel: 050-1569003
GPS: GA-263-8055
Email: customercare@agricbank.comWEIJA BRANCH
Near SCC Junction before
the new Shoprite 
on the Mallam- Kasoa Road
Tel: 030-2853081 / 030-2853083
GPS: GS-0166-0410
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
LABONE JUNCTION BRANCH
Labone Junction Off the 
Ring Road East, 
Near Danquah Circle
Tel: 055 2818 953  
GPS: GL-015-7692
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
ADABRAKA BRANCH
Opposite Long View Pharmacy on 
the Kojo Thompson Road   
GPS: GA-074-0708
Tel: 030-2242417   
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
MADINA BRANCH
Opposite Rawlings Park on the 
Barclays Lane
Tel: 030-2668265 / 030-2674308 / 
030-2675596
GPS: GM-016-4945
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
NIMA BRANCH
Near Nima Market, St. Kizito Parish, 
Off Nima-Mamobi Road
Tel: 0302-264 512 
GPS: GA-025-4476
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
NUNGUA BRANCH
Off Teshie – Nungua Road, 
In front of the Nungua market
Tel: 030-2712660 / 0302-717078  
GPS: GZ-023-2058
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
OSU BRANCH
Near Papaye Restaurant on 
the Oxford Street.
Tel: 030 2782386 / 030 2779696 
030-2779695 
GPS: GA-081-4642 
Email: customercare@agricbank.comRIDGE BRANCH
AFC Building, Opposite 
National Theathre on the Liberia 
Road
Tel: 0307001562 
GPS: GA-107-2442
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
RING ROAD CENTRAL 
BRANCH
On Ring Road, Next to Bust Stop 
Restaurant   GPS: GA-048-9626
Tel: 030-2229110  / 030-2239409
Email: bidun@agricbank.com
LEGON BRANCH
Credit Union Building, 
University of Ghana.
Tel: 0208-957231/0554-356399
GPS: GA-419-8111
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
WISCONSIN UNIVERSITY 
BRANCH
Wisconsin University College
No: 0243453632
GPS: GE-281-057
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
MAKOLA
Opposite Rawlings Park on the 
Barclays Lane
tel: 0302 2675596 / 0302 668265
0302 674308
GPS: GA-183-8740
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
SPINTEX ROAD BRANCH
Opposite Ghana Commercial Bank 
on the Spintex Road.
Tel: 030-2816212 / 0302816213
GPS: GZ-367-7394
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
TEMA EAST (ASHAIMAN)
Off Tema – Akosombo Road, Near 
the Ashaiman Timber market
Tel: 050-1569002 / 030-3308011
GPS: GB-011-7408
Email: customercare@agricbank.com108         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 108
109         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 109TEMA MAIN BRANCH
At the fishing Harbour, Near Pioneer 
Foods, New Town   
GPS: GT-062-1117
Tel: 030-3203371 / 030-3206396
Email: nmills@agricbank.com
TEMA-MANKOADZE AGENCY
Tema Community 1, near VIP Station
Tel: 030-3204756
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
 
TEMA MERIDIAN BRANCH
Tema Community 3, 
Close to former Meridian Hotel
Tel: 030-7010321
GPS: GT – 020 -0866
Email: abasit@agricbank.com
TESHIE BRANCH
St. Anne’s Parish premises, Teshie 
Road
Tel: 0300-2712664 / 0302-712549   
GPS: GZ-018-4537
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
BUKOM ARENA  
SSNIT SPORTS EMPORIUM
SSNIT Sports Emporium, Bukom
Telephone: 055 2569 489
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
DIAMOND HOUSE BRANCH
Diamond Cement Group Building, 
Steel Works Rd, Tema
Tel: 055-9722793    
GPS: GA-107-2442
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Ashanti Region
ASHANTI BEKWAI BRANCH
Near Bekwai Post Office & Police 
Station
Tel: 032-24203157 / 032-2420315
032-242035 / 032-2420357   
GPS: AB-0000-8169
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
EJISU BRANCH
Amakom Street, Near City Style 
Building
Tel:032-2398705 / 032-2398704
032-2033481 / 032-2049576
GPS: AE-0000-1704
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
ADUM BRANCH
Nyarko Kusi Amoa Street, Near 
Central PrisonsTel: 032-2031537 / 032-2039854
032-221521
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
KUMASI-CENTRAL MARKET
BRANCH
Kumasi Zongo, behind the 
Zongo Police Station      
Tel: 032-2033481 / 032-2033461/
032-2033455 / 032-2033914
GPS: AK-038-8417
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
PREMPEH II ST. BRANCH
Prempeh Street, Near Hotel De 
Kingsway
Tel: 032-2045263 / 032-2045275
032-2045276 / 032-2045277
GPS: AK-018-6205
Email:
customnercare@agricbank.com
NEW EDUBIASE BRANCH
Near the Market
Tel: 020-6857305 / 032-219 2202 
033-2192226
GPS: A3-0000-6939
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
OBUASI BRANCH
Obuasi Main Road, Opposite 
Metro Mass Station
Tel: 032-2440701 / 032-2540700
GPS: AO-028-4692
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
NHYIAESO BRANCH
Kumasi Main Road, Nhyieso 
Roundabout, Nyarko Plaza 1
Tel: 032-2190006  / 0322190008
GPS: AK-237-5343
Email: cgaamson@agricbank.com
Bono East Region
NKORANZA  BRANCH
Opposite the main market and 
adjacent to the VRA Office, Off the 
VRA Road.
Tel: 035 -2092074 / 035 -2097313
GPS: BO-0000-5543
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
ATEBUBU BRANCH
10 metres from the main Lorry 
station, On the Atebubu-Ejura Road
Tel: 032-2099568
GPS: BA-00005-3243
Email:customercare@agricbank.comTECHIMAN BRANCH
Off the Techiman - Tamale Road, 
Near the Tamale Station
Tel: 035- 2522304 / 035- 2091080 / 
035 -2091686 GPS: BT-0013-8877
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
Ahafo Region
KENYASI BRANCH
On the Kenyasi Road, Opposite the 
Kenyasi No.1 Police Station.
Tel: 035-2094858 / 035-2197828
035-2084594  GPS: BQ-0022-8978
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
GOASO BRANCH
On Goaso Road, 100 metres away 
from the lorry stationand adjacent to 
Glory Oil Filling Station.  
GPS: BU-0003-1974
Tel: 035-2094370
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
KWAPONG BRANCH
Kwapong Main Road, 
Adjacent PBC Office
Tel: 032 -2034795  
GPS: BV-0660-8420
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
Bono Region
SUNYANI BRANCH
Sunyani-Berekum Road, Near 
Sunyani Post Office and Opposite 
Telecom.
Tel: 0352025631 / 0352023107 / 
0352027075
GPS: BS-0006-3520
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
BEREKUM BRANCH
Near the Berekum 
Training College and 
next to the Berekum Library.
Tel: 035-2222104 / 035-2222153 
035-2222507
GPS: BB-0022-8879
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
DORMAA AHENKRO BRANCH
Near the Traffic light on the 
Dormaa main road
Tel: 035-2322251 / 035 -2322037
035 -2322165
GPS: BD-0002-2056
Email: customercare@agricbank.com110         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 110
111         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 111Central Region
AGONA SWEDRU BRANCH
Opposite Calvary Crusaders Church, 
Off Swedru Street
Tel: 033-2093517/ 033-2192883
GPS: CO-0000-9131
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
ASSIN FOSU BRANCH
Opposite the Foso Lorry station 
Opposite the Foso Lorry station on 
the main Cape Coast-Kumasi Road
Tel: 033-2140548 / 033-2192203 / 
033-2192200
GPS: CR-0008-8501
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
CAPE COAST MAIN BRANCH
Chapel Square opposite John 
Wesley Methodist Church
Tel: 031-7010094  
GPS: CC-008-3558
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
KASOA BRANCH
Off the Bodweasi Road, 
Near Nsaniya Secondary School
Tel: 055-2560717  
GPS: CX-013-6878
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
MANKESSIM BRANCH
At Abochie area on the Ajumako road
Tel: 034-020 93017 / 034-209 3015
GPS: CM-0412-5849
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
UCC BRANCH
Near Casely – Hayford Hall, UCC 
Campus GPS CC-007-3155
Tel: 033-2131989   
GPS: CC-143-7930
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Eastern Region
ASIAKWA BRANCH
Off the Kyebi – Bunso Road, 
Adjacent the Asiakwa Police Station. 
EE 1314-8594
Tel: 0302-962 144 / 0302-962 145
GPS: EE-1314-8792
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
KADE BRANCH
Off Okumaning Road, Adjacent GCB. 
P.O.Box KD 31, Kade. 
GPS: EK 0005-0093
Tel: 0302 963 285 / 0302 963 286
Email: customercare@agricbank.comKOFORIDUA BRANCH
Opposite B. Foster Bakery, Off B 
Foster Road. GPS EN 0100-632
Tel: 034-2022739 / 034-2022235/ 
034-2021048  GPS: EN-010-0736
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
NKAWKAW BRANCH
Off Nkawkaw-Kumasi Road ,Near 
Ghana Commercial Bank and Behind 
Total Filling Station.  
GPS: EJ-0000-5072 
Tel: 020-4345378 / 034-3122041 
034-3122068, 034-3122028, 
034-3122457
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
SUHUM BRANCH
Off Suhum-Koforidua Road, Near 
Fanteakwa Rural Bank or Near the 
Police station. GPS: ES-0000-8212
Tel: 034-7070198 / 034-2522373
034-2522374
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Northern Region  
     
SAVELUGU BRANCH
5 minutes drive from Airport junction 
on the Salvelugu/Walewale road Or 
closer to Savelugu Hospital 
Tel: 037-2095822 / 037209822 / 
037209820  GPS: NU-0020-3873
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
TAMALE-ABOABO BRANCH
Near Aboabo Market, Off Tamale – 
Aboabo Road. GPS: NT-0005-7016
Tel: 037-2026242 / 037-2023700
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
TAMALE-MAIN BRANCH
Bolga Road Near Ghana 
Commercial Bank
Tel: 037-2022629 / 037-2022938
GPS: NT-0003-5994
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
YENDI BRANCH
Left from SSNIT on Gushegu Road 
directly opposite Alhaji Baba mosque
Tel: 020-4345425 / 
426 / 037-7010033 
GPS: NY-0029-2275
TAMALE KALADAN 
Off the Tamale – Kaladan Road
Tel: 037-2022061 / 037-2022014
GPS: NT-0020-7358
Email: customercare@agricbank.comNorth East Region
  
WALEWALE BRANCH
5 minutes walk from the main lorry 
station on the main high street of 
Tamale/Bolga road. 
Tel: 055-2559468  
GPS: ND-00001-4206
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Savannah Region  
BOLE BRANCH
Wa Road, Near the SSNIT Office 
GPS: NB-00013-0010
Tel: 0372-292172 
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
BUIPE BRANCH
In front of Islamic Primary School, 
Off Kintampo – Tamale Road. 
GPS: N3-00007-1641
Tel: 0302-962-150 / 0372-092 171
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Upper East Region
BAWKU BRANCH
Near Bawku Post Office, 
Off Bawku Main Road 
Tel: 020-4581275 / 050-4851100
GPS: UA-0083-5128
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
NAVRONGO BRANCH
On the main commercial street on 
the UDS road share boundaries with 
Bencyn Pharmacy 
GPS: UK-0007-8361 
Tel: 038-2122200 / 038-2122 204
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
BOLGATANGA BRANCH
Opposite Jubilee Park. 
GPS: UE-0002-8510
Tel: 038-2022321 / 038-2022439 / 
038-202178
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Upper West Region
WA BRANCH
Near SSNIT Office, Off WA main road
Tel: 039-2022095 / 039-2022090 / 
039-2022342
GPS: XW-0006-6353
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
TUMU BRANCH
On Wa Main Road
Tel: 038-2092312
GPS: XS-00003-9114
Email: customercare@agricbank.com112         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 112
113         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 113Volta Region
DENU BRANCH
Near E.P. Church, Off the 
Denu - Adafianu Road
Tel: 036-0530313 / 036-2530613 / 
036-2531210
GPS: VZ-0039-5125 
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
HO BRANCH
In the old Bank for Housing and 
Construction (BHC) premises 
at Toviedzi. Next door to Ghana 
Commercial Bank
Opposite the Municipal Police Station  
GPS: VH-0002-9235
Tel: 036-2028250 / 036-2028284 / 
036-2028289
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
HOHOE BRANCH
Close to the Bank of Ghana 
and VODAFON office    
GPS: VC-0000-0409
Tel: 036-2722027 / 036-2722008
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
JUAPONG BRANCH
Located on the Volta star textile 
Limited (Juapong textiles) road
Tel: 034-2094299 / 034-2094376  
GPS: VT-4198-6051
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
KPANDO BRANCH
Near Weto Rural Bank, Opposite 
Kpando Ghana Commercial Bank 
Near Weto Rural Bank, Opposite 
Kpando Ghana Commercial Bank  
GPS: VP-0006-3528 
Tel: 036-2350939 / 036-2350942
036-2350941 / 0362350940
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
KPEVE BRANCH
Near Kpeve Market, 
Off the Hohoe Road
GPS: VE-0007-9139
Email: customercare@agricbank.comSOGAKOPE BRANCH
Near Volta View Hotel/Directly 
opposite the main bus station, 
Off Tema - Aflao Road 
Tel: 030-2955386/396 / 020-820 
5488   
GPS: VU-000-0755
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Oti Region
KPASSA  BRANCH
Kpassa Township, 
close to the Market
Telephone: 055 9747890
GPS: VO-0000-8483
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
NKWANTA BRANCH
Approximately hundred meters off the 
main road (i.e. the Eastern Corridor).  
Tel: 054-4338198 / 054-4338199  
GPS: VO-00000-8683
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Western North Region
ENCHI BRANCH
Adjacent Electricity 
Company of Ghana. 
Tel: 031-2622124  
GPS: WA-00003-0414
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
SEFWI ESSAM BRANCH
Near Essam Lorry Station
Tel; 055 2673 058 
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
BONSU NKWANTA BRANCH
Near Bonsu Nkwanta Market. 
Tel: 032-2190715  
GPS: WQ-3173-8051
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
JUABOSO AGENCY
Juaboso, close to the market 
close to Fire Service  
Telephone: 055 2569 492
GPS: WQ-0000-4041
Email: customercare@agricbank.comSEFWI WIAWSO BRANCH
Opposite Sefwi Wiawso Police 
Station at the end of the Municipal 
Assembly Road. 
Tel: 031-209 2093/0322-296 339
GPS: WG-0000-2686
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Western Region
AGONA NKWANTA BRANCH
off Agona Nkwanta -Takoradi Road, 
Opposite Champion Filling Station 
or Police Station. 
Tel: 033-2093517 / 033-292883  
GPS: WH-0002-9770
Email: customercare@agicbank.com
TAKORADI BRANCH
Harbor Road, Next to GCB Bank. 
GPS: WS-406-2512 
Tel: 031-2023511/ 031-
2029060/68/49 
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
TAKORADI MARKET CIRCLE 
BRANCH
Locate us on the Collins Street 
Ameen Sungari Building beside 
Grovy Spot
GPS: AM 29 Collins Street 
WS-245-7732 
Call 059 3845 659 • 059 3845 673
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
GREL APEMENIM BRANCH
Near rubber factory, GREL Office
Tei: 030-3962913  
GPS: WH-0254-8493
Email: customercare@agricbank.com114         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 114
115         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 1152120
PROXY
I/We__________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________of________________________________________________________________being 
member(s) of Agricultural Development Bank Plc hereby appoint ______________________________________or 
failing him, DAASEBRE AKUAMOAH AGYAPONG II, Chairman of Agricultural Development Bank Plc , P. O. Box 4191, 
Accra, as my/our proxy to vote for me/us on my/our behalf at the Annual General Meeting of the Company to be held at 
the 4th Floor, Accra Financial Centre, Accra at eleven o’clock (11:00am) in the forenoon on August 10, 2022 and at any 
adjournment thereof.
Please indicate with a tick in the space below how you wish your votes to be cast
Resolutions 
For Against Abstain
1. To receive and consider the financial 
statements and reports of directors and 
auditors for the year ended 31st December 
2021;
2. To re-elect the following directors retiring 
by rotation:
i. Mr. George Kwabena 
      Abankwah-Yeboah;
ii. Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare;2(i) 
2(ii)
3. To approve the remuneration of directors 3
4. To authorise the directors to determine 
the remuneration of the auditors for the 
financial year ending December 31, 2022. 4
Dated this ___________________________ day of __________________________ 2022
Signed_____________________________________________116         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 116Proxy
Annual Report and Financial Statements
THIS FORM SHOULD NOT BE COMPLETED AND SENT TO THE SECRETARY IF THE SENDER WILL BE ATTENDING 
THE MEETING.
1. Provision has been made on the form for DAASEBRE AKUAMOAH AGYAPONG II, the Chairman of the Meeting, to 
act as your Proxy but if you so wish, you may insert in the blank space the name of any person whether a member of 
the company or not who will attend the meeting and vote on your behalf instead of the Chairman.
2. In the case of joint holder, each holder must sign. In case of a company, the Proxy Form must be signed by a Director 
and its Common Seal appended. 
If you intend to sign a Proxy, please sign the above Proxy Form and post/submit it to reach the Registrar, Central 
Securities Depository, Cedi House, Accra within 48 hours before the meeting.117         2021 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 117


Extracted from: Website_ADB-2020-Annual-Report-1.pdf
2         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            3         Vision 
To be the people’s bank, harnessing the transformational 
power of agribusiness for wealth creation.
Mission
Growing a strong customer-centric Bank,  providing profitable 
and diversified financial  services for a sustained contribution 
to agricultural  development and wealth creation.
Core Values
Trust - It is the currency that makes it possible for us to work 
together, build integrity and earn the right to be the people’s 
bank. 
Innovation - We will embrace our responsibility solve 
problems and consistently add value to our customers. 
Proactiveness - By putting ourselves in the customers 
shoes we will be timely in honouring our service promise.VISION, MISSION & CORE VALUES4         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
TABLE OF CONTENT
Notice of Meeting  05
Resolutions to be Passed at the Annual General Meeting 06
Corporate Information 09
Report of the Directors 10
Information on Key Management  22
Report from Board Chairman  27
Report from Managing Director 31
Independent Auditor’s Report 34
Statement of Profit or Loss 38
Statement of Comprehensive Income                                                                       39
Statement of Financial Position 40
Statement of Changes in Equity 41
Statement of Cash Flows 43
Notes to the Financial Statements 44
Value Added Statement Appendix I
Shareholders’ Information Appendix II
About Us 105
Proxy Form         115 2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            5         NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT the 34th Annual 
General Meeting of Agricultural Development Bank Limited 
will be held virtually and streamed live to shareholders 
on https://agricbankagm.com from the 4th Floor, Accra 
Financial Centre, Ridge, Accra at 11.00 AM on Thursday 
August 12, 2021 to transact the following business:
AGENDA
Ordinary Resolutions
1. To receive and consider the financial statements and 
reports of directors and auditors for the year ended 
31st December 2020;
2. To appoint  the following as directors:
• Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II; 
• Hon. Alhaji Habib Iddrisu;
• Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah;
3. To re-elect the following directors retiring by rotation:
• Mary Abla Kessie;
• Peter Quartey;
• Evron Rothschild Hughes 
4. To approve the remuneration of directors;
5. To authorise the directors to determine the remuneration 
of the auditors for the financial year ending 
December 31, 2021;
Dated this 21st day of July, 2021 
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD 
SGD. 
GODWYLL ANSAH
COMPANY SECRETARY
NOTES:
1. Due to the corona virus pandemic and consequent 
restrictions on public gatherings pursuant to the 
Imposition of Restrictions Act, 2020 (Act 1012) and 
other regulations, attendance and participation by 
members or their proxies in the meeting shall be by 
virtual means (I.e. through an electronic platform with 
audio-visual capacity which provides members or their 
proxies reasonable and fair opportunities to participate 
and engage with the directors and auditors);2. A member who is unable to attend the General Meeting 
is entitled to appoint a proxy to attend and vote on his/
her/its behalf. A proxy need not be a member of the 
company;
3. A proxy form can be downloaded from www.agricbank.
com and may be filled and sent via email to info@
csd.com.gh or deposited at the Company’s Registrar, 
Central Securities Depository on 4th Floor, Cedi 
House, Liberia Road, Accra, or posted to the Registrar 
at PMB CT 465 Cantonment, Accra to arrive at any 
time during working not less than forty-eight hours 
prior to the commencement of the meeting.
4. All relevant documents in connection with the meeting 
are available to shareholders from the date of this 
notice on the Company’s website (www.agricbank.
com).  
Accessing and Voting at the Virtual AGM
A unique token number  will be sent to shareholders by 
email and /or SMS from August 3, 2021 to give them 
access to the meeting.  Shareholders who do not receive 
the token can contact the CSD on: info@csd.com.gh or 
call 0302 906576/0303 972254 any time after August 7, 
2021 but before the date of the AGM to be sent the unique 
token.
To gain access to the Virtual AGM, shareholders must 
visit: https://agricbankagm.com and input their unique 
token number on Thurssday, August 12,  2021.  For 
shareholders who do not submit proxy forms to the 
Registrar of the Company prior to the meeting, they may 
vote electronically during the Virtual AGM again using their 
unique token number.  Further assistance on accessing 
the meeting and voting electronically can be found on 
https://agricbankagm.com
For further information, please contact The Registrar:
Central Securities Depository (CSD) Ghana Limited, 
4th floor, Cedi House, Accra 
Tel:(233) 0302 906576/0303 972254 
Email: info@csd.com.ghNOTICE OF MEETING6         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
RESOLUTIONS TO BE PASSED AT THE 
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
The Board of Directors will propose the following ordinary 
resolutions, which will be put to the Annual General 
Meeting for consideration and approval:
ORDINARY RESOLUTIONS
1. To receive and consider the Financial 
Statements and Reports of the directors and 
auditors for the Year ended 31st December 
2020. 
The Board will lay before the Annual General 
Meeting for consideration the audited accounts 
of the company for 2020, and the reports of the 
directors and auditors thereon, as a true and fair 
view of the state of affairs of the company for the 
year ended December 31, 2020, and will propose 
the following resolution:
That the accounts of the company for the year 
ended December 31, 2020 and the reports of the 
Directors and Auditor thereon be and are hereby 
deemed duly considered.
2. To appoint the following as directors of the 
Bank:
a. Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II;
b.  Hon. Alhaji Habib Iddrisu;
c.  Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah.
By a letter dated July 2, 2021, the Government of 
Ghana nominated Messrs. Daasebre Akuamoah 
Agyapong II, Hon. Alhaji Habib Iddrisu and 
Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah for appointment as 
directors of the company.  In accordance with 
clause 76 of the Constitution of the Company, the 
Board will recommend that the three (3) nominees 
be so appointed and will accordingly propose 
resolutions for the appointment of the nominees 
subject however to the approval of the Bank of 
Ghana and all other regulatory approvals.
i. Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II: Daasebre 
Akuamoah Agyapong II is the Kwawuhene 
and the President of the Kwahu Traditional 
Council. He is also the Vice President of the 
Eastern Regional House of Chiefs. 
Daasebre is a Chartered Accountant by profession 
(Association of Chartered Certified Accountants 
(ACCA)-UK – Member) and further holds BSc. Administration-(Accounting Option) University of 
Ghana and MBA-Finance and Investment Banking 
from Lincoln University – California, USA. He is 
currently pursuing a law degree from the GIMPA 
Law School.
Daasebre previously worked as Audit Associate 
at KPMG (2006 - 2009) Account Clerk at Health 
Net (MHNGS), San Rafael, CA, USA (02/2010 
– 01/2011 and Inventory Manager at SEJUKAB 
Enterprise. He was the  Superintendent-
Management Accountant (Capital and Cost) 
of Abosso Goldfields Ltd Ghana (09/2011 – 
08/2013), Consultant for Thonket Company Ltd. / 
Thonket Plantpool Ltd (1/1/2015- 31/08/2016) and 
Director of KAYROCK Co. Ltd. /SEJUKAB Co. 
Ltd. - (01/15- to date). 
Daasebre is 38 years old. 
In accordance with clause 76 of the Constitution of 
the Company, the Board will recommend that he 
be so appointed and will accordingly propose the 
following resolution:  
That members hereby duly appoint Daasebre 
Akuamoah Agyapong II as a director of the 
company subject to all regulatory approvals.
ii. Hon. Alhaji Habib Iddrisu: Alhaji Habib 
Iddrisu is a 35-year-old Politician. He is 
currently the Member of Parliament for the 
Tolon Constituency and the Deputy Majority 
Chief Whip in the Parliament of Ghana. Prior 
to his election as a Member of Parliament, 
he held notable leadership positions in both 
the public and private sectors in Ghana and 
abroad. These include Deputy Head, Ghana 
Free Zones Authority, Tema Processing 
Zone (April 2017 – December 2020), Chief 
Executive Officer, Fadhab Investment 
Company Limited, Ghana (June, 2017 – 
date) and Supervisor, Perth International 
Airport, Australia (2012 to 2014). He holds 
Bachelor’s Degree in Communication Studies 
other and other relevant career certificates, 
Graduate diploma,Graduate certificate and 
diploma in Leadership and Management, 
Human Resource Management, Law and 
Governance, Administration and Management, 
Journalism and Media Studies and Security. 
Hon.Alhaji Habib Iddrisu is currently pursuing 2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            7         an Executive Master of Arts in Governance 
and Leadership at the Ghana Institute of 
Management and Public Administration.
          In accordance with clause 76 of the Constitution 
of the Company, the Board will recommend 
that he be so appointed and will accordingly 
propose the following resolution: 
That members hereby duly appoint Hon. Alhaji 
Habib Iddrisu as a director of the company 
subject to all regulatory approvals.
iii. Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah: Prof. Eric 
Yirenkyi Danquah is a 63-year-old Professor of 
Plant Genetics at the University of Ghana.  He 
holds BSc. Agric (Crop Science), University 
of Ghana, MPhil Plant Breeding, University of 
Cambridge, England and PhD Genetics, University 
of Cambridge, England. He is a former Head of 
Department, Department of Crop Science (2005-
2006), University of Ghana, Legon and Dean, 
International Programmes, University of Ghana 
(2006-2009). He is the founding Director of West 
Africa Centre for Crop Improvement, University of 
Ghana (2007 – to date) and the 2018 Laureate, 
Global Confederation of Higher Education 
Associations for the Agricultural and Life Sciences 
(GCHERA), World Agriculture Prize (WAP).
From 2019 to 2021, Professor Danquah worked 
as a visiting Scientist, Department of Global 
Development, College of Agriculture and Life 
Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, USA 
and adjunct Professor, Institute of Agriculture, 
University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.
He is the President, African Plant Breeders 
Association, (APBA) (2019 – date), Chairman, 
Advisory and Oversight Board, Samira 
Empowerment and Humanitarian Projects (SEHP) 
(2017 to date) and Founder, Eric Danquah 
Foundation.
He was the Chairman of the Governing Council, 
University of Mines and Technology (UMaT), 
Tarkwa, Ghana, (2014 to 2016) and Director, 
Biotechnology Centre, College of Basic and 
Applied Sciences, University of Ghana (2014 to 
2019).
Professor Danquah has over 130 published 
scholarly articles to his credit.
In accordance with clause 76 of the Constitution of 
the Company, the Board will recommend that he be so appointed and will accordingly propose the 
following resolution:  
That members hereby duly appoint Prof. Eric 
Yirenkyi Danquah as a director of the company 
subject to all regulatory approvals.
3. To re-elect to the following directors retiring by 
rotation
The following directors of the company:  
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie, Prof. Peter Quartey 
and Mr. Evron Rothschild Hughes will 
retire in accordance with section 325 of the 
Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and clause 
76 of the Constitution of the company. Mrs. 
Mary Abla Kessie, Prof. Peter Quartey and Mr. 
Evron Rothschild Hughes who are all eligible 
for re-election, have offered themselves to be 
re-elected as directors of the company.
The Board will recommend that they be so 
re-elected and will propose the following 
resolutions:
i. That Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie, who is 
retiring by rotation and who, being 
eligible, has offered herself for 
reelection in accordance with clause 
76 of the company’s Constitution and 
section 325 of the Companies Act, 
2019, be and is hereby re-elected as a 
director of the company.
ii. That Prof. Peter Quartey, who is retiring 
by rotation and who, being eligible, 
has offered himself for re-election 
in accordance with clause 76 of the 
company’s Constitution and section 
325 of the Companies Act, 2019, be 
and is hereby re-elected as a director 
of the company.
iii. That Mr. Evron Rothschild Hughes, 
who is retiring by rotation and who, 
being eligible, has offered himself for 
re-election in accordance with clause 
76 of the company’s Constitution and 
section 325 of the Companies Act, 
2019, be and is hereby re-elected as a 
director of the company.
4. To Approve the Remuneration of the Directors
In accordance with section 185 of the Companies 
Act, 2019 (Act 992) and clause 82 of the 
Constitution of the company, the Board will request 
that shareholders approve  the remuneration of the 8         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
Executive Director as disclosed in Note 43 of the 
2020 Annual Report of the company.
The following resolutions will be proposed:
i. That in accordance with section 185 
of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) 
and clause 82 of the Constitution 
of the company, approval be and is 
hereby given for the remuneration of 
the Managing Director, Dr. John Kofi  
Mensah on substantially the same 
terms as existed in his previous contract 
as detailed in Note 43.
ii. In accordance with section 185 of the 
Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and 
clause 82 of the Constitution of the 
company, the Board will request that 
shareholders approve the remuneration 
payable to Non-Executive directors 
to be an amount not exceeding an 
aggregate of GHS 240,000.00 as fees 
and sitting allowances per director per 
annum and these fees and allowances 
shall be applied until the Shareholders 
shall revise it.
5. To authorise the directors to determine the 
remuneration of the Auditors for the financial 
year ending 2021. December 31, 2021;
In accordance with section 140 of the Companies 
Act, 2019, the Board will request that they be 
authorised to fix the fees of the external auditor, Ernst & Young, for the year ended December 31, 
2021. The following resolution will be proposed:
That the directors be and are hereby authorised to 
fix the remuneration of the auditor in respect of the 
year ended December 31, 2021.
THIS FORM SHOULD NOT BE COMPLETED 
AND SENT TO THE SECRETARY IF THE 
SENDER WILL BE ATTENDING THE MEETING.
1. Provision has been made on the form for 
MR. ALEX BERNASKO, the Chairman of 
the Meeting, to act as your Proxy but if you 
so wish, you may insert in the blank space 
the name of any person whether a member 
of the Company or not who will attend the 
Meeting and vote on your behalf instead of 
the Chairman.
2. In the case of joint holder, each holder must 
sign. In case of a company, the Proxy Form 
must be signed by a Director and its Common 
Seal appended.
If you intend to sign a Proxy, please sign the 
above Proxy Form and post/submit it to reach 
the Registrar, Central Securities Depository, Cedi 
House, Accra.Proxy Form available on page 1152020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            9         CORPORATE INFORMATION
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Mr. Alex Bernasko   ||  Chairman
Dr. John Kofi Mensah   ||  Managing Director
Mr. George Kwabena Abankwah Yeboah   ||  Non - Executive Director
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie   ||  Non - Executive Director
Prof. Peter Quartey   ||  Non - Executive Director
Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare   ||  Non - Executive Director
Mr. Kwesi Korboe   ||  Non - Executive Director (Resigned on December 7, 2020)
Hon Dr. Mark Assibey-Yeboah   ||  Non - Executive Director
Mr. Evron Rothschild Hughes   ||  Non - Executive Director (Appointed on June 12, 2020)
COMPANY SECRETARY
Mr. Godwyll Ansah
Accra Financial Centre
3rd Ambassadorial Development Area
P. O. Box 4191
Accra
REGISTERED OFFICE
Accra Financial Centre
3rd Ambassadorial Development Area
P. O. Box 4191
Accra
AUDITORS
Ernst & Young 
Chartered Accountants
G15, White Avenue
Airport Residential Area
P. O. Box KA 16009, 
Airport
Accra, Ghana10         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
REPORT OF THE DIRECTORS
Directors’ responsibility statement
The directors are responsible for the preparation of financial 
statements that give a true and fair view of Agricultural 
Development Bank Limited (ADB), comprising the 
Statement of Financial Position at 31 December 2020, and 
the Statements of Profit or Loss and Other Comprehensive 
Income, Changes In Equity and Cash Flows for the year 
then ended, and the notes to the financial statements which 
include a summary of significant accounting policies and 
other explanatory notes, in accordance with International 
Financial Reporting Standards and in the manner required 
by the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and 
Specialised Deposit–Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 
930). In addition, the directors are responsible for the 
preparation of the report of the directors. 
The directors are also responsible for such internal 
controls as the directors determine is necessary to enable 
the preparation of financial statements that are free from 
material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, 
and for maintaining adequate accounting records and an 
effective system of risk management.The directors have 
assessed the ability of the Bank to continue as a going 
concern and have no reason to believe that the business 
will not be a going concern in the year ahead.The auditor 
is responsible for reporting on whether the financial 
statements give a true and fair view in accordance with the 
applicable financial reporting framework.
Limits on investment by banks or specialized 
deposit-taking institutions in respect of non-
subsidiary institutions.
The Bank holds equity investments in the  following 
institutions:
Institution % Holding 
Ghana International Bank Limited 9%
Agridev Real Estates Limited 10%
Metro Mass Transportation Ltd 16%
Activity Venture Finance Company 20%
As at the reporting date, the value of investment in 
Ghana International Bank Limited was GH¢ 70,170 which 
represents 11%% (eleven percent) of the net of own funds 
of the Bank (GH¢ 639,224). This holding is in breach of 
section 73(1) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-taking 
Institutions Act, 2016 (Act, 930), which states that “Bank 
or Specialised Deposit-taking Institution shall not invest or 
hold investments in the share capital of a body corporate 
other than a subsidiary of the bank or specialized deposit-
taking institution if the amount of investment exceeds ten 
percent of the net own funds of the bank or specialized 
deposit-taking institution.”Also, all the Bank’s investments in non-subsidiary 
institutions are in breach of section 73(3) which states 
that “Bank or Specialised Deposit-taking Institution shall 
not invest or hold investments in the share capital of 
a body corporate other than a subsidiary of the bank or 
specialized deposit-taking institution that represents more 
than five percent interest in the body corporate”.
However, Management has engaged the necessary 
processes to divest these investments accordingly. 
Management has assessed the financial implication of the 
non-compliance and conclude that it is not material to the 
financial statements taken as a whole.
Corporate social responsibility
Amounts spent on corporate social responsibility amounted 
to GH¢4,025,000  (2019: GH¢2,115,000 . These included 
best farmer sponsorship, donations to schools and others 
of national interest.
Financial statements review
The financial results of the Bank for the year ended 31 
December 2020 are set out in the attached financial 
results, highlights of which are as follows:
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Profit  after tax 
(attributable to equity 
holders)65,403 14,823
to which is added the 
balance brought forward 
On accumulated losses (289,349) (294,086)
(223,946) (279,263)
Out of which is 
transferred to:
The statutory reserve in 
accordance with section 
34 of the Banking Act.(32,702) (7,412)
Transaction cost related 
to Right issue                                                                                                         (327) (12,487)
Transfer from/(to) credit 
risk reserve4,739 9,813 
Leaving a balance to be 
carried forward of252,236 289,3492020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            11         Impact of COVID -19
Management has assessed the impact of the COVID - 19 pandemic on the going concern status of the Bank in the 
foreseeable future and has concluded that the use of going concern is proper and that the Bank will be able to recover 
its assets and discharge its liabilities at least in the next 12 months. Management has noted however, that COVID – 
19 poses a risk to strategy as well as to its operations and is therefore closely monitoring and formulating policies to 
mitigate risk as appropriate.
The Bank being a commercial bank, does business with various customers who trade and interact with counter parties 
across the world who may be affected by the coronavirus.
Funding and Liquidity
The Corona virus pandemic is expected to impact liquidity risk, exchange rate risk and interest rate risk faced by 
the Bank. The trend of capital flows from emerging markets is expected to exert pressure on the local currency as 
well as reduce foreign currency liquidity in the economy. The Bank has a robust liquidity management framework and 
contingency funding plan that builds in adequate buffers to support liquidity run-off in a stress scenario. The liquidity ratio 
of the Bank as at 31 December 2020 was 117.76% and projects that it will remain above the internal limit of 40% and the 
regulatory limit during the crisis period. Also, the Bank’s foreign currency open positions are expected to remain within 
tolerable limits in line with its risk appetite.
Five-year financial highlights
2020 2019 2018 2017 2016
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Total assets                                                                              5,715,794 4,577,659 3,597,395 3,545,143 3,035,493
Loans and advances to customers (net) 1,911,988 1,468,653 1,068,814 1,139,356 1,005,302
Deposits from customers 4,281,037 3,392,209 2,586,265 2,541,010 2,147,450
Shareholders’ equity 850,623 793,384 639,711 479,013 454,778
Profit/(Loss)before tax 97,690 17,884 34,057 47,339 (105,714)
Profit/(Loss) after tax 65,403 14,823 5,908 26,510 (70,026)
Earnings per share (Ghana pesewas):
Basic 18.85 6 3 11 (166)
Diluted 18.85 4 3 11 (166)
Return on equity (%) 7.69 1.87 0.92 6 (15)
Return on assets (%) 1.14 0.32 0.16 1 (2)
Number of staff     1,460 1,489 1,195 1,179 1,197
Number of branches and agencies 83 83 82 78 78
The Bank recorded profit after tax of GH¢65,403 (2019: GH¢14,823) for the year under review and there was transfer 
to the Statutory Reserve from Retained earnings during the year GH¢32,702 (2019: GH¢7,412).  The cumulative 
balance on the Statutory Reserve Fund at the year-end was GH¢141,214 (2019: GH¢108,512).
Dividend  
The directors do not recommend the payment of dividend.  The directors consider the state of the Bank‘s affairs to be 
satisfactory.
Nature of business
The Bank is registered to carry on the business of Universal Banking. The Bank’s principal activities comprise corporate 
banking and retail banking. There was no change in the nature of business of the company during the year.The objective 
of the Bank is to provide unique Universal Banking products and services with emphasis on agriculture to both the local 
and international clients. 
Shareholding
The Bank is listed on the Ghana Stock Exchange. The Bank’s shareholding structure at the end of the year was as 
follows:12         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 Shareholder Names  No. of shares held % Holding
1 FINANCIAL INVESTMENT TRUST (FIT)  222,218,113 64.05%
2 GOVERNMENT OF GHANA  74,579,327 21.50%
3 GHANA AMALGAMATED TRUST PLC  39,076,924 11.26%
4 ESOP  5,983,828 1.72%
5 DOE, OSCAR YAO O. Y. D.  2,631,681 0.76%
6 COFIE, MARK BLEWUNYO KODJO M. B. K. C.  2,100,629 0.61%
7 NANA, SOGLO ALLOH IV  54,800 0.02%
8PARACELSUS PHARMACY & MARKETING CONSULTANCY LTD,  
P. P. M. C. L. 50,000 0.01%
9 BONDZI-SIMPSON, LESLIE  26,600 0.01%
10 MR, JOHN BEKUIN-WURAPA  20,000 0.01%
SUBTOTAL of TOP 10  346,741,902 99.94%
Others  210,351 0.06%
TOTAL  346,952,253 100.00%
Related party transactions
Information regarding directors’ interests in ordinary shares of the Bank and remuneration is disclosed in Note 43 to the 
financial statements as well as those related to associated company. Other than their contracts as directors, no director 
had a material interest in any contract to which the Bank was a party during the year. Related party transactions and 
balances are also disclosed in Note 43 to the financial statements. Related party transactions which are credit related 
starts with the Credit Committee. On presentation to the Board, the affected directors disclose their interest and recuse 
themselves for the deliberations. The approval is subsequently given, and balances are also disclosed in Note 41 to the 
financial statements.
Auditor 
The Auditors, Ernst and Young, have indicated their willingness to continue in office in accordance with Section 139(5) 
of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) as well as Sections 81(4) and 81(5) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking 
Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930). Amount of audit fee payable as at 31 December 2020 was GH¢ 755,611.2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            13         PROFILE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Name Nationality Age Position Other Directorships Held
Alex Bernasko Ghanaian 69 Board Chairman
Mary Abla Kessie Ghanaian 65 Non-Executive Director• Family Health Medical School 
• Auto Mall Limited 
Prof. Peter Quartey Ghanaian 52 Non-Executive Director• Startrite Montessori School 
• Institute of Statistical 
• Social and Economic Research
Abena Osei-Asare Ghanaian 43 Non-Executive Director• Social Security and National Insurance 
Trust
• National Health Insurance Board
• Ghana Integrated Aluminium  
Development Corporation
George Kwabena 
Abankwah-YeboahGhanaian 60 Non-Executive Director• Sharp Pharmaceuticals Ltd 
• Gulf Consolidated Limited
• Kyauto Ghana Limited
Hon. Dr. Mark 
Assibey-Yeboah Ghanaian 46 Non-Executive Director
Mr. Evron 
Rothschild HughesGhanaian 51 Non-Executive Director
Dr. John Kofi 
MensahGhanaian 59 Managing Director• Ghana International Bank Plc
• Enyan Denkyira Rural Bank
• GET Fund
• Venture Capital Trust FundProfileBOARD OF DIRECTORS14         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
Alex Bernasko – Board Chairman 
Independent and Non-Executive Director
Mr. Bernasko was appointed the Chairman of the Board in August 2017. He is 69 years old. 
He is a Legal Practitioner and Notary Public. He has served on several Boards including 
the Export Development and Investment Fund (EDIF) and Ghana Tourist Development 
Company. His working experience includes former Secretary to the Bank of Ghana and 
then Advisor and member of the Bank of Ghana’s top management.
He holds a BA (Hons Social Sciences) from KNUST, Barrister-at-Law from the Ghana 
School of Law and Qualifying Certificate in Law from the University of Ghana, Legon. 
He also holds certificates for courses attended in several institutions including the Royal 
Institute of Public Administration U.K. and the International Monetary Fund, U.S.A. He is 
a member of the Ghana Bar Association, International Bar Association and the Institute 
of Directors, Ghana.
Mary Abla Kessie 
Independent and Non-Executive Director
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie was appointed to the Board of the Bank in August 2018. She is 65 
years old. She is a lawyer, a Notary Public, a certified Director and Corporate Governance 
expert. 
Mrs. Kessie previously served on the Boards of British Telecom Global Services, and 
Kosmos Energy LLC. She has a wealth of knowledge and experience in the Banking and 
Financial Services sector and held several positions during her banking career. 
She holds a Bachelor of Laws Degree from the University of Ghana and a Barrister at Law 
from the Ghana School of Law. She is a member of the Ghana Bar Association and the 
Institute of Directors, Ghana.
Prof. Peter Quartey
Independent and Non-Executive Director
Prof. Peter Quartey was appointed to the Board of the Bank in August 2018. He is 52 
years old. He is currently the Director of institute of Statistical, Social and Economic 
Research at the University of Ghana, Legon. He is a former Head of the Department of 
Economics and a former Director of Economic Policy Management at the University of 
Ghana, Legon. He had previously served on a number of boards including the University 
of Ghana Credit Union, National Population Council Board, and the Faculty of Social 
Studies at the University of Ghana, where he was a member of the University of Ghana 
Strategy Committee. 
Prof. Quartey has also provided consultancy services to various institutions including 
NEPAD, World Bank, African Development Bank, and USAID. He has several publications 
to his credit. He holds a Ph.D. in Development Economics from the University of 
Manchester.
Biographical Information of Directors
The Board consists of a Non-Executive Chairman, six (6) other Non-Executive Directors and one (1) 
Managing Director. The Non-Executive Directors are independent of management and free from 
management constraints that could interfere with the exercise of their objective and independent 
judgments. The Directors collectively possess strong functional knowledge, expertise, and experience to 
make valuable contributions to the Bank.
BIOGRAPHY OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            15         Abena Osei-Asare
Non-Executive Director
Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare was appointed to the Board in August 2018. She is 43 years 
old. She is the Deputy Minister of Finance and Member of Parliament for Atiwa-East 
Constituency. Abena previously worked with the New York University (NYU) and Ghana 
Barclays Bank (Ghana) Limited.She holds a BA (Economics and Geography) and an MSc 
(Development Finance) from the University of Ghana, Legon. She is also a Chartered 
Accountant.
George Kwabena Abankwah-Yeboah 
Non-Executive Director
Mr. Abankwah-Yeboah was appointed to the Board of the Bank in August 2017. He is 
60 years old. He is the Chief Executive Officer of Sharp Pharmaceuticals Limited. He is 
currently a director of United Perfumery and Pharmaceuticals Limited, Accra Technical 
University, and Gulf Construction Limited. He has previously served on several boards 
including CSRI STEPRI, Koforidua Technical University, Chairperson of the  Ghana 
College of Nurses and Midwives and the Association of Ghana Industries. He holds a 
Bachelor of Pharmacy (Hons) from KNUST, MBA (Finance) and an LLB (Hons) from the 
University of Ghana, Legon.
Hon. Dr. Mark Assibey-Yeboah 
Non-Executive Director
Dr. Mark Assibey-Yeboah was appointed to the Board of the Bank in August 2018. He 
is 46 years old. He is the immediate past Member of Parliament for New Juaben South. 
He is also the immediate past Chairman of the Finance Committee of the Parliament of 
Ghana. He previously worked as a Senior Economist at the Bank of Ghana. He holds a 
BSc (Hons Agricultural Economics) from KNUST, and an MS (Agricultural and Resource 
Economics) from the University of Delaware, USA. He also holds an MA and a Ph.D. both 
in Economics from the University of Tennessee, USA.
Mr. Evron Rothschild Hughes 
Non –Executive Director 
Mr. Evron Rothschild Hughes was appointed to the Board on June 12, 2020. He is 
51 years old. He is a Development Economist, Investment Banker, and Branding & 
Communications Expert with more than two decades of multi-industry, professional 
experience at the management, executive, consulting, and entrepreneurial levels. He 
has 360-degree expertise in developing solutions to complex issues across various 
strategic and functional areas in Public Policy, Business, Finance, International Financial 
Transactions & Deal Structuring, and Corporate Finance Deals, with experience from the 
United Kingdom, South Africa, Rwanda, and Ghana. He is currently an Economic Advisor 
at The Presidency (Republic of Ghana).
He holds MPhil degree in Development Studies from the Cambridge University, United 
Kingdom, EMBA Finance from the University of Ghana Business School and BA (Hons) in 
Political Science with Philosophy from the University of Ghana
16         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
John Kofi Mensah 
Managing Director
Dr. John Kofi Mensah was appointed Managing Director 1st August 2017. He is an astute 
Banker and Economist with three decades of experience in different sectors of banking 
ranging from start-ups and delinquent bank operations, Credit and Foreign/Treasury 
management of Universal Banks. Since assuming the role of Managing Director of ADB, 
the Bank has witnessed a steady growth in its balance sheet from an initial negative 
balance to a now profit making bank and has also expanded its branch networks.He 
began his career at the erstwhile Bank for Housing and Construction in 1989 as an 
Economics and Research Officer and later Treasury Officer until 1995 when he joined 
Securities Discount Company (SDC) as a Deputy Chief Money Market Dealer. In 1996, 
he joined International Commercial Bank (Now FBN Bank) as a pioneer and Manager 
of Treasury/Foreign Operations and was elevated to the position of General Manager/
Deputy Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Bank.
He held several top management positions in other Banks including the defunct Unibank 
Ghana Limited and Capital Bank.He has served on several Boards including, the Ghana 
Technology University College (GTUC) and an Independent Non-Executive Director at 
Cocoa Processing Company (CPC). He is currently serving on the Enyan Denkyira Rural 
Bank, the Ghana International Bank (GHIB,UK) and the Ghana Education Trust Fund 
(GETFUND) Boards. He holds a Doctorate in Business Administration (Finance) from the 
SMC University of Zurich, Switzerland. He holds an MSc (Banking and Finance), Cum 
Laude from Finafrica in Milan, Italy and a BA (Economics & Statistics) from the University 
of Ghana-Legon. He did his Advanced Level Certificate at the St. Peters Secondary 
School, Nkwatia Kwahu, Eastern Region and his Ordinary Level Certificate at the Breman 
Asikuma Secondary School in the Central Region.
Dr. Kofi Mensah has also attended various capacity building programs, seminars and 
courses in Europe and Asia. He is also a fellow of the Institute of Professional Financial 
Managers (FIPFM), UK.
2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            17         Biographical information of Directors
Age Category Number of Directors
Up to – 40 years -
41 – 60 years 5
Above 60 years 3
Commitment to Corporate Governance
The key guiding principles of the Bank’s governance 
practices are:
i.  Good corporate governance for enhanced   
 shareholder value.
ii.  Clearly defined respective roles of Shareholders,   
 Board of Directors and Management in the   
 governance architecture.
iii.  The Board of Directors should have majority   
 of its membership as either Independent or   
 Non-Executive Directors, an Independent   
 Director may be broadly defined as a Non-  
 Executive Director who has the ability to exercise  
 objective, independent judgment after fair   
 consideration of relevant information and views   
 without undue influence from management or   
 from inappropriate external parties or interests. 
Independent directors in the case of banks with 
majority state interest, are directors appointed 
by government of Ghana in its capacity as a 
shareholder who in the reasonable opinion of the 
Bank of Ghana, are able to exercise independent 
judgement in relation to their role as directors of 
the Regulated Financial Institution and who are 
neither employees of the Regulated Financial 
Institutions, civil or public servants or other 
government officials, persons with direct links 
with government, nor persons who are actively 
engaged in party politics.  These principles 
have been articulated in a number of corporate 
documents, including the Bank’s Constitution 
and the Board Charter. 
iv. There is a Board Charter which spells out the   
 functions and powers of the Board and Board   
 Sub-Committees. There are also various policies   
 which define the role of the Board and the   
 Managing Director with regards to certain   
 specific matters including staff hiring and   
 discipline.
The Board of Directors
The Board is responsible for setting the institution’s 
strategic direction, leading and controlling the institution 
and monitoring activities of Executive Management.As at 31 December 2020, the Board of Directors of 
Agricultural Development Bank Limited consisted of eight 
(8) members made up of an Independent Non-executive 
Chairman, two (2) other Independent Non-Executive 
Directors, four (4) Non-executive Directors, and one (1) 
Executive Director. 
These Board members have wide range of experiences 
and in-depth knowledge in management, economics, 
finance, law and industry, which enable them to make 
informed decisions and valuable contributions to the 
Bank’s progress.  
The Board has delegated various aspects of its work to the 
Risk and Credit, Audit, IT, Research & Strategy, Human 
Resource and Governance and Cyber and Information 
Security Sub-Committee Sub-Committees.
Board Risk and Credit Committee
The role of the Committee includes:
1. Review and approval of the credit risk strategy 
and credit risk policies of the Bank and setting an 
acceptable risk appetite and tolerance the Bank is 
willing to engage and the level of profitability the 
Bank expects to achieve for incurring the various 
credit risks.
2. Review operational and market risks faced by the 
Bank and management of such risks;
3. Ensure the establishment in the Bank of a compliance 
culture including Anti-Money Laundering and 
Combating the Financing of Terrorism (“AML/CFT”) 
and promote the adoption of an appropriate ethical 
and compliance standards in the conduct of the 
business of the Bank.
4. Review all critical risks of the Bank namely;
a. Credit Risk;  
b. Assets and Liability (including Interest Rate) 
Risk; 
c. Liquidity Risk; 
d. Operational Risk; 
e. Foreign Exchange Risk; 
f. AML/CFT Risk; 
g. Legal Risk (outstanding litigation and 
contingent liabilities);  
h. Any other risks arising. 
5. Review and oversee the overall lending policy of the 
Bank, the  lending of the Bank above the delegation 
of the Management Credit Committee (MCC);18         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
6. Ensure that there are effective procedures and 
resources to identify and manage irregular or 
problem credits, minimize credit loss and maximize 
recoveries;
7. Direct, monitor, review and consider all issues that 
may materially impact on the present and future 
quality of the Bank’s credit risks management;
8. Assist the Board with discharging its responsibility 
to review the quality of the Bank’s loan portfolio, and 
ensuring adequate provisions for bad and doubtful 
debts in compliance with Bank of Ghana prudential 
guideline on Risk Classification of Assets and 
Provisioning and any other statutory regulation that 
may be in place.
The composition of the Committee is as follows:
Name of Director Position
Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare Chairperson
Mr. Kwesi Korboe Member
Hon. Dr. Mark Assibey-Yeboah
(From January to July)Member
Mr. Kwabena Abankwah-Yeboah Member
Mr. Evron Hughes (From July 2020) Member 
Board Audit Committee
i. The role of the committee includes:
ii. Providing oversight for the financial reporting 
process including the establishment of accounting 
policies and practices by the Bank;
 
iii. Providing oversight for Internal and external audit 
functions;
 
iv. Reviewing and approving the audit scope, depth, 
coverage and frequency and overall effectiveness;
 
v. Review and monitor the external auditors’ 
independence and objectivity, taking into 
consideration relevant professional and regulatory 
requirements;
 
vi. Review coordination between the internal audit 
function and external auditors;Receiving key audit 
reports and ensuring that Executive Management 
is taking necessary corrective actions in a 
timely manner to address control deviations and 
weaknesses, non-compliance with policies, laws 
and regulations;
 
vii. Providing a linkage between the Board and the Bank 
of Ghana, reviewing inspection reports, reviewing 
guidelines and circulars and ensuring compliance; 
viii. Annually recommending to the Board and Annual 
General Meeting (AGM), the appointment of the External Auditor, the audit fee and to advise the 
Board on any questions of resignation or dismissal 
of the External Auditors.
ix. To keep under review the Bank’s policy on non-
audit services provided by the External Auditors and 
recommend this to the Board having due regard to 
ensuring that the provision of such services does 
not impair the External Auditor’s independence or 
objectivity.
The composition of the Committee is as follows:
Name of Director Position
Mr. George Kwabena 
Abankwah-Yeboah 
(From January to July)Chairman
Dr. Mark Assibey-Yeboah Appointed Chair from 
July 2020
Professor Peter Quartey Member
Mr. Evron Hughes (From 
July 2020)Member
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie Member
IT, Research and Strategy Sub-Committee:
The role of the committee includes: 
i. Providing leadership in the implementation of IT 
policy strategy for the entire Bank that will lead to 
effective  use of IT to drive the Bank’s business;
ii. Reviewing and recommending for full Board approval 
all IT Policies recommended by the Management;
iii. Overseeing the deployment of new and cost-
effective IT solutions with a view to monitoring 
enhancing product quality, customer service delivery 
and reviewing their risk exposures to the Bank;
iv. Reviewing any significant IT incidents that have 
occurred and monitor trends in repeat incidences;
v.  Recommending for the approval of the full Board, 
any sourcing/introduction of new IT solutions in the 
Bank with a view to determining their sustainability 
for the Bank’s business;
vi. Reviewing the formulation and monitoring of the 
implementation of approved Strategic Plan of the 
Bank;
vii. Clearly determining for full Board approval, the 
annual Key Performance Indicators for Executive   
Management based on the approved Strategic Plan;
viii. Proposing for full Board approval, the reward 
for Executive Management upon attainment of 
approved performance targets and Key Performance 
Indicators;2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            19         ix. Advising the Board, in accordance with the approved 
Strategic Plan, in the allocation of resources of the 
Bank on a rational basis for sound commercial 
reasons;
Name of Director Position
Professor Peter Quartey Chairperson
Mr. Alex Bernasko (From July 2020) Member
Hon. Dr. Mark Assibey-Yeboah Member
Mr. George Kwabena 
Abankwah-YeboahMember
Mr. Kwesi Korboe 
(From January to July)Member 
Board Human Resource and Governance 
Committee
The role of the committee includes: 
i. Reviewing and making recommendations to the 
Board with respect to the size and composition of 
the Board, including reviewing Board succession 
plans;
ii. Assisting the Board as required in relation to the 
performance evaluation of the Board, its Committees 
and individual Directors; 
iii. Making recommendation to the Board on the 
appointment of the Managing Director, other 
Executives and Key Management Personnel;
iv. Reviewing and making recommendations on 
the remuneration strategy and packages of the 
Managing Director and other Key Management 
Personnel;
v. Reviewing reports on Senior Staff grievance and 
discipline and making recommendations to the 
Board.
vi. Considering and recommending to the Board an 
overall employment, compensation, performance 
management, retention and severance policy and 
philosophy for the Bank that is aligned with the 
Bank’s medium - and long-term business strategy.
vii. Having a strategic oversight of matters relating to 
the development of the Bank’s human resources 
with the main objective of attracting and retaining a 
competitive human resources base for the Bank.
The composition of the Committee is as follows:
Name of Director Position
Dr. Mark Assibey-Yeboah 
(From January to July)Chairman
Mr. Kwabena Abankwah 
YeboahAppointed Chair from 
July 2020
Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare 
(From July 2020)MemberMrs. Mary Abla Kessie Member
Mr. Kwesi Korboe Member
Cyber and Information Security Sub-Committee
Committee The role of the committee includes:
i. Determining the nature and extent of the significant 
cyber and information security risks the Bank is 
willing to take in achieving its strategic objectives;
ii. Identifying the cyber and information Security 
risks inherent in the business of the Bank, the 
control processes with respect to such risks and 
countermeasures;
iii. Outlining the enterprise and overall cyber and 
information security risk profile of the Bank;
iv. Ensuring the adequacy and effectiveness of the 
Cyber and Information Security risk management 
framework of the Bank;
v. Effectiveness of the information technology 
governance and its operations in the Bank;
vi. Determining the cyber and information security risk 
management strategy of the Bank; and
The composition of the Committee is as follows:
Name of Director Position
Professor Peter Quartey Chairperson
Mr. Alex Bernasko (From July 2020) Member
Hon. Dr. Mark Assibey-Yeboah Member
Mr. George Kwabena 
Abankwah-YeboahMember
Mr. Kwesi Korboe 
(From January to July)Member 
Schedule of attendance at Board and Committee 
Meetings
The Board met seventeen (17)    times during the year and 
the Board Sub-Committees, cumulatively, met thirty nine 
(39) times.
Below is the schedule of attendance at Board and Board 
Sub-Committee meetings during the year.
*Board (B), Audit Committee (AC), Risk and Credit 
Committee (RCC), Human Resource and Governance 
Committee (HRGC), IT, Research and Strategy/Cyber & 
Information Security Sub-Committee (ITRS/CIS), N/A as 
used above implies ‘Not applicable’ that is, the Director 
in question was not a member of the stated committee 
and hence could not have been expected to attend the 
Committee meeting.20         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
 Director B AC CRC HRCH ITRS/CIS
Mr. Alex Bernasko 16 N/A N/A N/A 3
Dr. John Kofi Mensah 16 6 `9 5 5
Mr. Evron Hughes 9 2 7 N/A N/A
Mr. George Kwabena 
Abankwah-Yeboah12 4 2 4 1
Dr. Mark Assibey-Yeboah 10 3 3 4 1
Hon. Mrs. Abena Osei-Asare 6 N/A 12 6
Prof. Peter Quartey 17 6 5 1 5
Mr. Kwesi Korboe 16 N/A 10 6 4
Mrs. Mary Abla Kessie 16 6 1 6 N/A
Board balance and independence
The composition of the Board of Directors and its Sub-
Committees is regularly reviewed to ensure that the 
balance and mix of skills, independence, knowledge and 
experience is maintained. 
Code of Conduct, Ethics Charter and Conflict of 
Interest Policies
The Board has approved Ethics Charter and Conflict of 
Interest policy that regulate the conduct of Directors.  In 
addition, an approved Code of Conduct regulates the 
Conduct of all employees. Management has communicated 
the principles in the Bank’s Code of Conduct to its 
employees to provide guidance in the discharge of their 
duties.  The above-mentioned policies set the standards 
of professionalism and integrity required for the Bank’s 
operations, which cover compliance with applicable 
laws, conflict of interest, environmental issues, reliability 
of financial reporting, bribery and strict adherence to 
laid down principles, to eliminate the potential for illegal 
practices.
Anti-Money Laundering and Anti-Terrorism
The Bank also has an established anti-money laundering 
and anti-terrorism system in place in compliance with 
requirements of Ghana’s Anti-Money Laundering Act 
2020 (Act 1044) and Anti-Terrorism Act 2008, Act 762. 
These include due diligence for opening new accounts, 
customer identification, monitoring of high-risk accounts, 
record keeping and training and sensitisation of staff on 
money laundering, which assist in reducing regulatory and 
reputational risks to its business.
Internal control systems
The directors have overall responsibility for the company’s 
internal control systems and annually reviews their 
effectiveness, including a review of financial, operational, 
compliance and risk management controls. The 
implementation and maintenance of the risk management 
and internal control systems are the responsibility of the 
executive directors and other senior management.  The systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate the 
risk of failure to achieve business objectives and to provide 
reasonable, but not absolute, assurance against material 
misstatement or loss.  The directors have reviewed the 
effectiveness of the internal control systems, including 
controls related to financial, operational and reputational 
risks identified by the company as at the reporting date 
and no significant failings or weaknesses were identified 
during this review.
Directors’ performance evaluation
At the end of the Financial Year, The Board of Directors, 
in accordance with Section 47 of the Bank of Ghana’s 
Corporate Governance Directives, engaged the services 
of an External Facilitator to perform a formal evaluation of 
Board’s performance. The formal evaluation will assess the 
performance and effectiveness of the Board and its Sub-
Committee members. Upon completion of the exercise, a 
copy of the report will be submitted to the Bank of Ghana 
in accordance with the Corporate Governance Directives.
Professional development and training
On appointment to the Board, directors are provided 
with a full, formal and tailored programme of induction, 
to familiarise them with the Bank’s business, the risks 
and strategic challenges it faces, and the economic, 
competitive, legal and regulatory environment in which the 
company operates.  Under the auspices of the National 
Banking College, the directors underwent a corporate 
governance certification programme that covered 
IT Governance and Cybersecurity;
Prudential Reporting Gaps and Issues in the Banks;
Sustainable Banking Practices – Roles of the Board; and
Corporate Governance Reporting and Disclosures. These 
trainings, together with the other training provided during 
the year, ensured that directors continually updated their 
skills, their knowledge and familiarity with the company’s 
businesses, and their awareness of sector, risk, regulatory, 
legal, financial and other developments to enable them to 
fulfil effectively their role on the Board and committees of 
the Board.2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            21         Conflicts of interest
The Bank has established appropriate conflicts authorization procedures, whereby actual or potential conflicts are 
regularly reviewed and authorizations sought as appropriate.  During the year, no such conflicts arose and no such 
authorizations were sought.
Approval of the financial statements
The financial statements of Agricultural Development Bank Limited, as identified in the first paragraph, were approved 
by the Board of Directors on March 29, 2021 and signed on their behalf by:
BOARD CHAIRMAN                                                                                                                   MANAGING DIRECTOR
22         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
KEY MANAGEMENT PERSONNELMANAGEMENT PROFILE
Dr. John Kofi Mensah 
Managing Director
Dr. John Kofi Mensah was appointed Managing Director 1st August 2017. He is an astute 
Banker and Economist with three decades of experience in different sectors of banking 
ranging from start-ups and delinquent bank operations, Credit and Foreign/Treasury 
management of Universal Banks. Since assuming the role of Managing Director of ADB, 
the Bank has witnessed a steady growth in its balance sheet from an initial negative 
balance to a now profit making bank and has also expanded its branch networks.He 
began his career at the erstwhile Bank for Housing and Construction in 1989 as an 
Economics and Research Officer and later Treasury Officer until 1995 when he joined 
Securities Discount Company (SDC) as a Deputy Chief Money Market Dealer. In 1996, 
he joined International Commercial Bank (Now FBN Bank) as a pioneer and Manager 
of Treasury/Foreign Operations and was elevated to the position of General Manager/
Deputy Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Bank.
He held several top management positions in other Banks including the defunct Unibank 
Ghana Limited and Capital Bank.He has served on several Boards including, the Ghana 
Technology University College (GTUC) and an Independent Non-Executive Director at 
Cocoa Processing Company (CPC). He is currently serving on the Enyan Denkyira Rural 
Bank, the Ghana International Bank (GHIB,UK) and the Ghana Education Trust Fund 
(GETFUND) Boards. He holds a Doctorate in Business Administration (Finance) from the 
SMC University of Zurich, Switzerland. He holds an MSc (Banking and Finance), Cum 
Laude from Finafrica in Milan, Italy and a BA (Economics & Statistics) from the University 
of Ghana-Legon. He did his Advanced Level Certificate at the St. Peters Secondary 
School, Nkwatia Kwahu, Eastern Region and his Ordinary Level Certificate at the Breman 
Asikuma Secondary School in the Central Region.
Dr. Kofi Mensah has also attended various capacity building programs, seminars and 
courses in Europe and Asia. He is also a fellow of the Institute of Professional Financial 
Managers (FIPFM), UK.
Alhassan Yakubu-Tali
Deputy Managing Director
Mr. Alhassan Yakubu-Tali was appointed Deputy Managing Director of the Agricultural 
Development Bank(ADB) Limited on August 15, 2017. 
He is a seasoned Investment Banker with 15 years of international experience spanning 
many multinational banks including, HSBC, Lehman Brothers Investment Bank, Bank of 
Tokyo and Fimat International Bank. He holds an MBA (Marketing) from the City University, 
Bellevue, USA (Frankfurt Campus); B.S. (Business Administration), also from the City 
University, Bellevue, USA (Frankfurt Campus); Diploma 2 (Business Administration) 
from West London College, London and Diploma 1 (Business Administration) from West 
London College, London. 
A married man, Alhassan is a polyglot and is fluent in German, English, Hausa and 
Dagbani. 
2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            23         
Edward Ian Armah-Mensah 
General Manager, Business Banking
Mr. Edward Ian Armah-Mensah joined ADB as Executive Head, Corporate Banking 
in 2010. He has also served as Chief Commercial Officer of the Bank, Group Head, 
Corporate Banking and is currently the General Manager, Business Banking. He has over 
24 years’ experience holding senior roles in the Ghanaian banking industry and over this 
period he has successfully led and set up Corporate Banking and Non-Bank structures 
from greenfields. 
He has an extensive experience in Corporate Finance with specialty in Deal Origination, 
Debt Restructuring, Trade Syndication, Trade/Cash Management and Asset Finance. 
He has deep and varied cross industry experience with Stanbic Bank (Ghana) Limited, 
Barclays Bank (Ghana) Limited and NDK Financial. Services Edward holds an Executive 
Master’s in Business Administration (Finance Option) and a Bachelor of Science in 
Business Administration both from the University of Ghana Business School. 
Samuel Dako
Chief Audit Executive
Mr. Samuel Dako has has over 26 years’ managerial experience in the Banking Sector. 
He joined the Bank as a Finance Officer and has served in various capacities including 
Financial Controller, Head of Financial Reporting and Strategy, Manager Research and 
Corporate Planning and Branch Operations Manager. He also has relevant managerial 
experience in Branch Banking, Risk Management and Internal Audit & Assurance. Samuel 
is a Non-Executive Director of Akuapem Rural Bank. 
He also serves on the Audit Committee of a couple of Public Institutions.He is a Chartered 
Accountant and a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants Ghana, Merit 
Award. He holds MBA Finance from the University of Leicester UK, Bachelor-of-Laws 
Degree from GIMPA, BL (Cand.) and Post Graduate Diploma in Management Information 
Systems, GIMPA. He is a Certified ISO 27001 Lead Implementer and Auditor.
Leon Bannerman–Williams
Chief Finance Officer
Mr. Leon Bannerman–Williams was appointed Chief Finance Officer (CFO) of the 
Agricultural Development Bank (ADB) Limited on 5th February, 2019. Mr. Bannerman-
Williams is an experienced Chartered Accountant. He began his career at the Controller 
and Accountant General’s Department in1989 and joined the Agricultural Development 
Bank in 1997 as a Finance Officer. He served in several capacities including, Branch 
Operations Officer from September 1999 to October 2005, for Koforidua, Ring Road 
Central and Cedi House Branches respectively and was appointed the Branch Manager 
forthe Tema Main Branch in 2005. In 2007 he was transferred to the Head Office as the 
Financial Controller where he successfully led the team in the processes towards the 
Bank’s first adoption of the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). 
In 2010, Mr. Bannerman-Williams joined the Credit Risk Department as the Credit 
Portfolio Manager, a role that involved high level credit portfolio analytics for Executive 
Management and later was appointed as the Head of Monitoring and Recoveries 
Department in 2015. He is a qualified Chartered Accountant and holds Executive Master 
of Business Administration (Finance) degree from the University of Ghana Business 
School. Mr. Bannerman-Williams is a Fellow of the Association of Chartered Certified 
Accountants (UK) and also a Member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants (Ghana).
24         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
Enoch Benjamin Donkoh 
General Manager, Operations
Mr. Enoch Donkoh was appointed in April 2019. He has a career in banking spanning 
more than twenty years beginning at the Agricultural Development Bank (ADB) where he 
was with the Accounts and later Foreign Operations Departments. He joined the Bank 
of Ghana (BOG) Banking Supervision Division for seven years and gained experiences in 
Internal Control Practices, Risk Management and also best Banking Practices. 
With his experience at BOG he moved to work with acouple of Savings and Loans 
Companies namely Pro-credit Savings and Loans Company as Head of Finance, Express 
Savings and Loans Limited as General Manager/Managing Director, Global Access 
Savings and Loans as an Executive Head and later Executive Director. He also worked as 
the Head of Operations at the Micro Finance and Small Loans Centre (MASLOC). Enoch 
Benjamin Donkoh is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants, Ghana (1999), 
holds a Bachelor of Science in Administration (Accounting) from University of Ghana and 
an MBA (Finance) from Central University College. He is the acting heading director of 
Cyber and Information Secucrity.
Da-Costa Asiedu Owusu-Duodu
Chief Risk Officer
Mr. Da-Costa Asiedu Owusu-Duodu was appointed as Chief Risk Officer of the Bank 
on March 1, 2019. He has previously worked with the Bank in 1997 as a Credit Risk 
Officer in the Loans and Advances Department of the Bank and later joined Techno 
Serve Incorporated as a Microfinance Specialist, under the Trade and Investment Reform 
Programme executed in collaboration with theUnited States Agency for International 
Development (USAID). 
Mr. Owusu-Duodu has an in-depth knowledge and experience in the banking industry, 
in the areas of credit origination, project finance, syndication, debt restructuring and re-
organization of distressed companies, across Agricultural Development Bank, CAL Bank 
and Universal Merchant Bank. With over 22 years’ experience in banking and a proven 
track record of success in the maintenance of high asset quality, he brings a wealth of 
expertise to a well-established banking brand. 
He holds a Master of Philosophy (MPhil) degree in Agri-Business Administration from 
the University of Ghana, Legon, and also a Bachelor’s Degree (B.Sc.) in Agricultural 
Economics from the same university.
Mrs. Amelia Croffie
Acting Head of Legal
Amelia Croffie (Mrs.) is the Acting Head of Legal of the Bank. She has about 29 years 
working experience in Corporate Law and Banking and engaged in legal advocacy. 
She holds a Bachelor of Arts Degree (Hons, Upper Division) in Law, Classical History 
& Civilization from the University of Ghana (1989) and a BL (Qualifying Certificate in 
Law) from the Ghana Law School (1991).She also holds an MBA (HR Option) from the 
University of Ghana (2003). She worked as a Teaching Assistant in Criminal Law and 
Police Administration at the Law Faculty of the University of Ghana (National Service) 
after her BL. She was the Legal Executive in Activity Venture Finance Company Limited 
(AVFCL), a government regulated venture capital finance company, which was set up 
among others to explore, pioneer and provide venture capital for businesses as a means 
of complementing the more traditional modes of lending in the financial sector.At AVFCL, 
she served in various roles including Board Secretary and was nominated as member of 
the Board of Directors on the then Midland Savings & Loans Limited as representative 
of AVFCL. She also served as a member of the Board of Directors for several years at 
Nyankumase Ahenkro Rural Bank in the Central Region of Ghana.
2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            25         
Bridget Kaminta Lekanong Nuotuo
Treasurer
Ms. Bridget Lekanong Nuotuo Kaminta joined ADB as Treasury Sales Manager in 2011 
and has been the Treasurer of the Bank since December March 2016. She has over 15 
years’ banking experience 13 years of which has been in treasury management. Bridget 
begun her banking career from Barclays Bank (Ghana) Limited where she was a Senior 
Dealer in charge of Retail and also held various positions in Retail Banking. 
Bridget holds an Executive Master’s in Business Administration (EMBA–Finance Option) 
from the University of Ghana Business School and a Bachelor of Commerce degree 
from the University of Cape Coast. She is also a Chartered Banker and a member of the 
International Financial Markets (ACI certified).
Godwyll Ansah
Company Secretary
Mr. Godwyll Ansah was appointed the Company Secretary on 1st April, 2019. He is a 
seasoned legal practitioner with over 18 years’ experience in legal and banking practice 
ranging from Legal Compliance, Anti-Money Laundering , Board Secretariat and Bad 
Debt Recovery. 
He worked at Bank of Africa Ghana Limited from December 2006 to March 2019 having 
held several positions including Head of Compliance, Head of Legal and Company 
Secretary. He also worked with Société General (Ghana) and Stanbic Bank Ghana 
Limited. Mr. Ansah holds a Master of Law (LLM) and Bachelor of Arts Degree (Law and 
Economics) both from the University of Ghana, Legon. He also attended the Ghana 
School of Law from 1999 to 2001 and was called to the Ghana Bar in October 2001. 
He is a member of the Ghana Bar Association.
Prosper Morgan Dodor
Head, Internal Control
Mr. Prosper Morgan Dodor is a seasoned banker with over 25 years’ industry expertise in 
the area of Internal Control, Trade Finance, Cash Management, Operations, Internal Audit 
and Credit Assurance.He is currently the Head of the Internal Control and Due Diligence 
Department at the Agricultural Development Bank (ADB), ensuring that standardisation 
of processes and policies are in line with best practice. 
Prosper Morgan Dodor holds a Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.) Degree in Business 
Administration (Accounting option) and an MBA in Finance from the University of Ghana, 
Legon. He is a Member ofthe Institute of Chartered Accountants (ICA) (Ghana) and 
Chartered Institute of Bankers (CIB, Ghana).
Dr. Fred Safo-Kantanka
Head, Compliance
Dr. Fred Safo-Kantanka holds a Doctorate  degree in Business  Management from the 
Atlantic International University, USA, a Master of Science Degree (MSc.) in Financial 
Management from the Middlesex University in UK, and a Bachelor’s Degree in Economics 
and Geography from the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science & Technology. He has over 
26 years’ progressive working experience in Compliance, Internal Audit and Assurance, 
including Risk Based Audit by providing standardized framework and guidelines for the 
identification, monitoring, controlling, measuring and Audit reporting.
He has significant experience in Risk Management, Credit Management, Banking 
Operations,Purchasing and Procurement Management. Prior to joining ADB, Fred 
worked in various capacities in a UK firm from 1995 to 2006, and served in various roles, 
including Stock Controller through to Supply Chain Management. Fred resigned from the 
Bank on March 31, 2021.
26         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
Papa Arko Ayiah
Anti-Money Laundering Reporting Officer
Papa Arko Ayiah is the Anti-Money Laundering Reporting Officer of the Agricultural 
Development Bank Limited. He has 20 years of banking experience, all in the employ 
of our Bank. He joined ADB in 2000 as an Officer Trainee with the Treasury Department 
and was on various schedules including Money Market Dealing. He also worked in the 
Communications Unit of the Bank as a Senior Communications Officer . 
Papa is a Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialist and a member of the prestigious 
Association of Certified Anti-Money Laundering Specialists (ACAMS), USA.He holds a 
Master of Laws in Alternative Dispute Resolution from the Faculty of Law, University 
of Ghana, a Bachelor of Laws from the Faculty of Law, Mountcrest University College 
(affiliated with KNUST), a Master of Arts in Human Resource Management from University 
of Cape Coast, and a Bachelor of Educational Psychology also from University of Cape 
Coast.
Kwame Asiedu Attrams
General Manager, Agribusiness
Kwame Asiedu Attrams assumed the role of General Manager for Agribusiness on 1st 
August 2019; he is a professional agriculturist with vast experience in the agricultural 
and financial sector. He has many years’ experience in the Banking sector having joined 
the Agricultural Development Bank in 2004 as a Credit Officer and later a Relationship 
Manager at the Agricultural Finance Department. As a Credit Officer in charge of Poultry 
and Livestock Projects he managed the Bank’s Broiler Outgrower program, also in his 
role as a Relationship Manager amongst several functions he was responsible for the 
efficient and effective management of Agricultural accounts. He was also responsible 
for the coordination, monitoring and evaluation of MIDA funded projects for the Bank. 
He represented the Bank on several Committees and Boards of Ministries, Departments 
and Agencies.
Mr. Attrams joined Access Bank Plc, Ghana in 2017 as the Head of Agro Allied Unit and 
helped set up the Agribusiness Unit of the Bank and also developed the agricultural 
finance strategy and products for the Bank. He has had other prior working experiences 
at Afariwaa Farms and Livestock Products Limited as Production Manager and 
Nutritionist; the Institute of Economic Affairs as a Legislative Research Assistant attached 
to the Parliament of Ghana and the University of Ghana as a Teaching Assistant in the 
Faculty of Agriculture. Mr. Attrams holds a first degree in Agriculture (Animal Science) 
and an MPhil in Animal Science (Nutrition) all from the University of Ghana and several 
other certificates from internationally recognized institutions such as the Kansas State 
University, USA and Galilee College, Israel. He is an old student of Prempeh College. A 
married man and devout Christian.
Jonas Kwabena Safo Baah
Head, Human Resources
Mr. Jonas Kwabena Safo Baah was appointed as the Head, Human Resources, on 1st 
July, 2019. He has considerable experience in Human Resources Management spanning 
over twenty (20) years’ experience in Ghana, fifteen (15) of which have been in the 
Banking industry. He has very good knowledge of the Human Resources functional areas 
especially, in the strategic areas of Performance,Talent and Succession Management. He 
has cross industry experience having worked with First Atlantic Bank Limited, Standard 
Chartered Bank (Ghana) Limited, Ecobank (Ghana) Limited and The Trust Bank (TTB) 
Limited. He also worked at The Capital Group Limited and GCAA. He holds a Master of 
Business Administration (Human Resources Management option) and Bachelor of Arts 
(Political Science) degrees from the University of Ghana, Legon and Bachelor of Laws 
(LLB) from GIMPA.
Mr. Alex 
Bernasko
2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            27         
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is my honour to present to you once again, my report for the 2020 financial year . 
Review of the Global and National Economy / COVID-19 Pandemic;
The year 2020 presented countries and corporate entities worldwide with extraordinary 
challenges of global proportions. The global economy experienced its worst recession 
since the Great Depression of the 1930s, with over 150 countries experiencing 
contractions in per capita GDP since 1870. In addition to over 2.6 million deaths 
globally, the pandemic reduced labour supply and productivity, while lockdowns and 
business closures caused supply disruptions. Layoffs, the loss of income and worsened 
economic prospects reduced household consumption and business investment.
Ghana was no exception.  Her citizens and economy were not spared the ravages of 
the pandemic. On March 14, 2020, the first daily cases of COVID-19 were recorded in 
the country. By December 2020, 55,168 total cases had been recorded. Unfortunately, 
three hundred and thirty five (335) of those infected had lost their lives by December 
31, 2020.
The pandemic adversely affected economic growth with the real GDP growth which 
was projected at about 4.9% declining to 0.3% by end 2020.
The outbreak of the pandemic adversely affected and threatened the lives of our 
employees, customers and their businesses. The businesses most adversely affected 
include those in hospitality such as hotels, car rentals etc., tourism, aviation, public 
transport and private schools. 
In response to the pandemic, the Bank of Ghana in March 2020 introduced a raft of 
measures to contain the impact of the COVID-19 on the Ghanaian economy. These 
included 
• Cut of Monetary Policy Rate to 8-year low from 16% to 14.5%;
• Lowering reserve requirements for lenders from 10% to 8% in order to provide 
liquidity support to critical sectors;
• Decrease in the banks’ conservation buffer from 3% to 1.5%, which cuts the 
capital-adequacy ratio from 13% to 11.5%. 
• Provisioning for Loans in the “Other Loans Especially Mentioned” (OLEM) category 
was reduced from 10% to 5% for all banks.
In addition to the above, the Bank of Ghana required banks to reduce interest margins 
by 2%. The Board worked closely with Management to extend appropriate support 
to our customers whose businesses were in distress to protect businesses and 
livelihoods. 
The Bank proactively introduced several measures, including:
• strict enforcement of the Ghana Health Services COVID-19 protocols;
• resort to virtual meetings and working from home in some circumstances; and
• running of shift system from May 2020 to decongest the Head Office and branches;
• Aggressive testing of staff in offices and branches where cases were suspected 
or confirmed etc. in order to minimise social interactions and avoid the potential 
spread of the disease in the Bank.  Mr. Alex 
BernaskoREPORT FROM BOARD CHAIRMANREPORTS28         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
Our best efforts notwithstanding, unfortunately, we lost 
four (4) of our staff to the pandemic in the course of the 
year under review. 
Review of Political Environment/2020 Elections;
The year under review was a year of general elections 
(parliamentary and presidential). The Electoral Commission 
successfully undertook compilation of new voters’ register 
and conducted general elections in December 2020 
without marked impact on the business of the Bank. 
Performance of the Banking Industry 
The banking landscape has twenty-three (23) banks, 
consisting of fourteen (14) foreign and nine (9) local Banks.
Balance Sheets of banks’ witnessed steady growth during 
2020 due to an expansionary government policy and the 
increase in deposits mobilised from Savings and Deposit-
Taking Institutions (SDI).  The movement of deposits from 
SDIs to universal banks was due to apprehension of SDI 
customers and flight to quality or safety. Industry total 
deposits increased by 26.8 percent, and net claims on 
Government by banks increased by 44.6 percent. On the 
other hand, credit extended to the private sector moderated 
throughout 2020. On an annual basis, net credit to the 
private sector slowed to 5.8 percent in December 2020 
compared with 23.8 percent in the corresponding period in 
2019. On gross basis, credit to the private sector grew by 
10.6 percent compared with 18.0 percent over the same 
comparative period.
The banking sector showed resilience to the first wave 
of the pandemic supported by strong policy initiatives 
and regulatory reliefs. The banking sector’s performance 
remained strong throughout 2020, with robust growth 
in total assets, deposits and investments. Overall, the 
impact of COVID-19 on the industry’s performance was 
moderate, as banks remained liquid, profitable and well 
capitalised. Total assets increased by 15.8 percent, of 
which Investments in Government bonds rose by 33.4 
percent. 
Solvency and liquidity indicators remained strong. The 
industry’s Capital Adequacy Ratio of 19.8 percent as at the 
end December 2020 was also well above the regulatory 
minimum threshold. Operating income rose by 17.9 
percent whilst operating expenses rose by 8.2 percent, 
albeit lower than the respective growth rates of 21.1 
percent and 12.1 percent in 2019. Loan loss provisions 
grew by 28.0 percent, higher than the 23.6 percent a year 
ago reflecting elevated credit risks in 2020. Profit before 
tax increased by 27.2 percent to GH¢6.1 billion compared 
to 34.7 percent a year ago. 
Implementation of the COVID-related regulatory reliefs 
and policy measures helped support lending activities. 
New Advances in 2020 grew by 15.8 percent to GH¢34.4 
billion in 2020. Banks provided support and reliefs in the 
form of loan restructuring and loan repayment moratoria 
to cushion 16,694 customers severely impacted by the pandemic. Total outstanding loans restructured by banks 
as at December 2020 amounted to GH¢4.47 billion, 
representing some 9.4 percent of industry loan portfolio. 
Non-Performing Loans (NPL) ratio increased from 14.3 
percent in December 2019 to 15.7 percent in June 2020 
arising from the pandemic-induced repayment challenges, 
but declined to 14.8 percent in December 2020 due to loan 
write-offs and increased credits, particularly during the last 
quarter. 
Performance of ADB
Esteemed shareholders, I am pleased to note that amidst 
the global pandemic and lockdowns, year on year, the 
Bank was more profitable, posting a profit after tax of 
GHS65.4 million compared to GHS14.9 million in 2019. 
This represented over 400% growth in performance in 
2020, occasioning a Return on Equity and Return on 
Assets of 7.69% and 1.14% as against 1.87% and 0.32% 
in that order respectively. 
The size of our balance sheet experienced a significant 
growth over the year from GHS4.6 billion in 2019 to 
GHS5.7billion in 2020 (24%) bolstered in part by our 
improved holdings in investment securities in line with our 
strategic objectives, just as we saw an expansion of 30% 
in net loan assets from GHS1.5 billion in 2019 to GHS1.9 
billion in 2019. The Non-Performing Loan portfolio of the 
Bank witnessed significant reduction from 41% in 2019 to 
34% in 2020. Our target is to bring the NPL ratio within 
industry brackets by 2023. Deposits grew by 26% from 
GHS3.4 billion in 2019 to GHS4.2 billion in 2020.  
By the end of 2020, the capital adequacy ratio and the 
Basel Committee inspired capital requirement directive 
were 16.5% and 14.5% respectively, both above the 
minimum regulatory. 
Really, an intricate analysis of the financial performance 
of our Bank would show that we improved in each and 
every sphere; interest income saw a growth of 28% from 
GHS419.2 million in 2019 to GHS628.9 million in 2020 
whilst gross non-interest revenue also increased by 12% to 
GHS158.7 million in 2020 compared to GHS141.8 million 
in 2019. In the area of cost savings and management, total 
operational expenditure was well contained thus finding 
expression in the overall cost to income ratio of 78.2% at 
year end, a marked upgrade from 2019 position of 92.2%. 
Indeed, all the relevant indices presented a positive outlook 
providing basis for the bank climbing up three places from 
the 20th positon to 17th position in the ranking of banks in 
2020
Board Changes
In December 2020, Mr. Kwesi Korboe, who had been 
appointed as the Chief Executive Officer of Ghana 
Incentive-Based Risk-Sharing System for Agricultural 
Lending (GIRSAL) resigned from the Board. 2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            29         Corporate Governance
During the year under review, directors underwent 
corporate governance certification training to keep them 
abreast with new trends on the banking industry landscape. 
The modules delivered under the auspices of the National 
Banking College were:
• IT Governance and Cybersecurity;
• Prudential Reporting Gaps and Issues in the Banks;
• Sustainable Banking Practices – Roles of the Board; 
and
• Corporate Governance Reporting and Disclosures.
The Board reviewed and adopted a revised Three-Year 
Strategic Plan (2021-2023) for the Bank. The exercise 
afforded Management and the Board the opportunity to 
rethink the reason for the Bank’s existence and to redefine 
its mission and vision statements, strategic objectives 
and core values to  bring them more in alignment with the 
Bank’s raison d’être. 
The reviewed Strategic Plan, which spans the period 
2021 to 2023, provides, among other things, the guidance 
to influence the Bank’s current operating model and the 
changes that will ensure its sustainability and growth. KPIs 
and metrics for their measurement have been developed 
into effective dashboards for monitoring and evaluation.
The Board additionally undertook robust performance 
assessment of the Executives and introduced revised 
Key Performance Indicators for Executives to align their 
performance objectives with the revised Strategic Plan of 
the Bank. 
The Board also set 2021 as the period for externally 
facilitated performance evaluation of the Board in 
compliance with the requirements of the Corporate 
Governance Directives of the Bank of Ghana.  
ISO/IEC 27001 Certification
On October 9, 2020, the Bank attained ISO 2700 
certification status. The certification process entailed 
series of preparatory processes including realignment of 
the operations of the Bank to be more compatible with 
the ISO standards and adoption of new policies (124 ISO 
27001 and PCI DSS policies and standards) to improve 
controls and minimise risk in the Bank’s Information 
Security Management Systems. These policies and 
standards are intended to enhance Information Security 
Management Systems. 
Besides the above, The Board also reviewed and approved 
some long outstanding policies and formulated new ones 
for its adoption.  
The Bank also applied to join the Green Climate Fund. 
As a prerequisite for joining the Green Climate Fund, the 
Bank is required to adopt some new polices. These include 
Environmental and Social Safeguard, Gender and Equality and Whistle Blower & Witness policies. These new policies 
are currently being reviewed by the Board for approval.
The new and revised policies are expected to create a 
more robust environment for risk mitigation and enhanced 
performance of the Bank. 
Corporate Social Responsibility
As a socially responsible Bank, ADB has been extensively 
involved in positively affecting lives by giving back to 
society through our Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
activities. In 2020, a total amount of GHS4,025,000.00 
(Four Million and Twenty-Five Thousand) was spent on 
our CSR activities. 
This amount represented a double of the previous year’s 
commitment mainly because of the novel coronavirus 
pandemic that hit the world and continue to affect our daily 
lives. 
The Bank devoted an amount of over One Million 
Ghana Cedis (GHS1,000,000.00) to the fight against 
the pandemic by donating two hundred thousand Ghana 
Cedis (GHS200,000.00) to the government through the 
COVID-19 Trust Fund.
A number of health institutions and organizations including 
the Greater Accra Regional Hospital, Cape Coast 
Teaching Hospital, Tamale Teaching Hospital, the Ghana 
Immigration Service, Noguchi Medical Research Institute, 
and the Ministry for Food and Agriculture were supplied with 
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), which significantly 
helped to protect frontline workers and thereby save many 
lives. Vulnerable people in our communities were also 
supported to enable them stay safe.
Additionally, through the Ghana Association of Bankers, 
the Bank donated to the Government of Ghana, and 
reduced charges on several of its products to help our 
customers.As part of our commitment to the Ghanaian 
public, we remained one of the few Banks to continue with 
our Saturday Banking services to our customers.
The Bank continued with its flagship support to the 
National Best Farmers’ Day celebration by awarding the 
2020 National Best Farmer with GHS480,000.00 i.e. the 
Ghana Cedi equivalent of One Hundred Thousand United 
States Dollars (US$100,000.00. The Bank also continued 
with its sponsorship of the National Welcome Cocktail 
and the National Farmers Forum. As a leading financier 
of agribusiness, we maintained our sponsorship of the 
national Farmer’s Day, a testimony of ADB’s commitment 
to supporting opportunities for wealth creation through 
agriculture.
The Bank supported a number of sporting activities in 2020 
to help unearth talent and promote youth development. 
Key among these were the sponsorship of Ghana Boxing 
Authority for Amateur Boxing League and Professional 
Championship Fights and the National Sports Authority for 
the national cross-country program. 30         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
Some other important activities the bank sponsored in 2020 
were the Ghana Journalists Association (GJA) Awards, 
Youth Empowerment Development Ghana to complete 
Training Centre for vulnerable young girls in Tamale and 
Lepers Aid Committee towards construction of a clinical 
laboratory for leprosy and skin disease in Wa in the Upper 
West Region.
We remain committed to ensuring that our communities 
benefit from our presence. 
Conclusion 
I use this opportunity to express our immense gratitude 
to all our stakeholders, especially our shareholders, 
customers, the Government of Ghana, the Ministry of 
Food & Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance, State-Interest Governance Authority, the Central Bank as our regulator 
and our employees. Over the past four years, thanks to 
your support, loyalty and patience, we have significantly 
evolved the fortunes of the Bank: from a significant loss 
making to a significant profit-making Bank. With the 
profitability of the Bank growing year by year, we anticipate 
to completely turnaround the negative income surplus 
accumulated prior to 2017 and thus begin to pay dividends 
to our shareholders. 
We will additionally continue to strive to remain true to 
one of the key reasons for our existence: i.e.  to continue 
to play significant role in agribusiness financing whiles 
keeping risk under control. 
Thank you.2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            31         
Dr. John Kofi 
MensahMANAGING DIRECTOR’S REPORTREPORTS
INTRODUCTION
Dear Shareholders: 
It was a very remote thought that the year 2020 would be consumed by a once-in-a-
century health crisis that would upend the global economy and the lives of everyone 
on our planet. It was a year filled with immense pain and uncertainty but also courage 
and purpose — and we can take heart that even as it did its worst, the global pandemic 
has brought out the best in us.
2020 was a year that tested ADB like never before. From the onset, the Board and 
Management revised the Bank’s three-year strategic plan to ensure that it adequately 
helped to address present challenges and was forward looking enough to stand the 
bank in good stead to thrive in the long-term.  By choosing to be more intentional 
about why ADB exists, the leadership team recognized the potential of this purpose to 
drive the transformation of Ghana’s agricultural economy and to motivate employees 
to pursue the bank’s ambition. Whilst protecting its main ethos, ADB needed to 
differentiate itself from competition in the universal banking space in a manner that 
continued to maximize shareholder value.
With this vision, the bank seeks to inspire a deeper sense of purpose, a strong sense 
of identity and a compelling image of a preferred future. It reflects what the bank 
seeks to become; and provides a clear view of what it is trying to accomplish for all 
its stakeholder groups.
BUSINESS REVIEW
In the midst of the tumultuous impacts of the pandemic, we turned in appreciable 
financial results during 2020. Indeed, in an operating environment that was more 
uncertain and challenging than any in recent memory, all the operational performance 
indices pointed skyward relative to 2019. 
Profit before tax of GH¢97.7 million for the year ended 31 December 2020 was 
445.81 per cent growth over 2019 (GH¢ 17.9 million). Bottom-line profit of GH¢65.4 
million was up 341.89 per cent on 2019 (GH¢14.8 million) The increase in profitability 
was driven by strong performance in treasury and credit operations funded by an 
aggressive deposit drive. 
The net interest income was GH¢415.4 million for the year ended 31 December 2020 
(2019: GH¢ 300.1 million), representing a 38.42 per cent increase. This was mainly 
driven by booking quality loans and the effective monitoring of the loan book.
Our relentless focus on cost efficiency led to a reduction in cost to income ratio from 
92 per cent (2019) to 78 percent (2020).  This achievement was in line with measures 
dictated in our revised strategic plan.
For the renewed plan, the Bank was positioned to leverage its unique strength in 
agribusiness to increase the agric share in our asset portfolio which culminated in our 
loans and advances experiencing a sharp growth of 30 percent over net loans and 
advances in 2019.32         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE
Remarkably, the Bank in 2020 demonstrated the value 
of our diversified and robust business model. Significant 
strides were exhibited in the E-banking space, by providing 
payment solutions that are safe, secure, and convenient to 
its customers. To decongest the Banking halls especially 
during the peak of the Covid-19 era, the Bank provided 
an easy self-service registration on its Mobile Banking 
application - USSD *767#. This enabled customers to have 
access to their Bank accounts and perform basic banking 
activities which includes balance enquiry, transfers, mobile 
money interoperability, airtime purchases, bill payments, 
GHQR payments with the potential of increased revenues 
to mention but a few. This has seen a significant growth in 
the number of subscribers for the period. 
The Bank also improved on its domestic proprietary debit 
card product by migrating from the magnetic stripe card 
to an enhanced Chip and PIN module Card which is the 
GH-Link Card. The GH-Link debit card has multichannel 
capabilities, that enable cardholders to use the payment 
channel that is most convenient and best fit at meeting 
customer needs for the payment of goods, services, funds 
transfer or accessing cash. 
The Bank also signed on to the Mobile Money Interoperability 
platform since its launch by the Vice President. This service 
allows direct and seamless transfer of funds from one 
mobile wallet to another mobile wallet across networks. 
Being the first Bank in Ghana to complete the Visa 
Contactless Certification Point-of-Sale acceptance project 
with Visa International in 2019, the Bank has deployed a 
number of Point of Sale devices to Hotels, Supermarkets, 
Restaurants etc. to facilitate the acceptance of contactless 
card payments at their respective locations.
ISO/IEC 27001 Certification
The Bank, for the year under review, attained the ISO 
27001 certification after meeting its broad objectives of 
Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability.  On the achievement 
of this great feat, we look forward to streamlining all 
other areas of the bank and adopting other management 
systems such as Quality Management System – QMS 
(ISO 9001), Business Continuity Management – BCMS 
(ISO22301), IT Services Management - ITSMS (20000) 
and Enterprise Risk Management – ERM (ISO 31000). This 
will constitute the ADB Integrated Management System. 
The bank’s Card environment is also being prepared to 
conform to the industry standard for Card business. We 
are looking forward to certifying in Payment Card Industry 
Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) alongside the ISO 
certifications.Refocusing on Agriculture Mandate
In line with its strategic objective to increase the agricultural 
loan portfolio to 50% of the bank’s total loan portfolio, the 
Bank in 2020 deepened its financial intermediation to 
players in the agricultural value chain. To provide ready 
market for the expected increased farmers’ output under 
the Planting for Food and Jobs, the Bank approved 
an amount of GH¢70.0 million as working capital to the 
National Food Buffer Stock Company Ltd (NAFCO) to buy 
off excess produce for storage as buffer stock. 
Agro-Based Support for IDIF
The Bank remained an active partner for the implementation 
of the novel One District One Factory Programme (1D1F). 
We approved total loans of about GH¢104.00 million in 
favour of some seventeen viable projects to undertake 
among others broiler production and processing, fruit 
processing, general manufacturing, construction,jute bags 
production as well as fish farming and processing. 
Strategic Alliances with Special Initiatives
The Agricultural Development Bank in 2020 collaborated 
with MOFA and GIRSAL to finance rice and soya millers 
to buy stock off farmers and process for sale in the local 
market. A substantial amount was approved by the Ministry 
of Finance from the Out-grower Value Chain Finance 
(OVCF) recoveries fund for the purpose. The essence 
was to increase local production and processing of rice 
and soybean in Ghana, using the value chain approach, 
by financing the critical actors along the value chain. In 
the year under review, the Bank imported 1,300 outboard 
motors made up of 1200 (40HP units) and 100 (15HP 
units) Yamaha products at a cost of GH¢19.8million for 
the Ministry for Fisheries and Aquaculture Development 
and the Coastal Development Authority. As part of the 
Bank’s Corporate Social Responsibility activities, the 
Bank absorbed all incidental and related costs amounting 
to about GH¢7.0 million. The support was to reduce the 
drudgery associated with fishing and improve income of 
fishers.
Broiler Value Chain Scheme
The Bank launched the broiler revitalization programme 
dubbed ADB Broiler Value Chain Programme. The initiative 
aimed to invest a total of GH¢500.00 million of soft loans 
in businesses in the broiler value chain to help achieve the 
following: 
• Serve as import substitute for the huge volumes of 
poultry products imported into the country annually.2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            33         • Provide employment to a number of youth (a 
minimum of 550) in each of the regions where the 
scheme would be implemented.
• Revive the poultry industry which once was a major 
source of livelihood for farmers in the Greater 
Accra, Ashanti and the then Brong Ahafo regions 
• Engender the production of maize and soya beans, 
major feed ingredients for broiler production.
Out-grower Support Scheme
The Bank embarked on Out-grower financing Scheme to 
support local raw material based industries and processing 
factories.  these are in the areas of cereals, vegetables 
and tree crops.
AWARDS
The Bank continued to receive recognition and awards 
from research-based publications and awarding institutions 
for its sterling performance and strategic contribution to 
wealth creation through agribusiness. In the year under 
review, the hard work and commitment of management 
and staff ably guided by the Board won the Bank several 
awards and recognition. 
Some of these awards being Excellence in Leadership in 
Cocoa Financing at the 2nd edition of the Cocoa Awards and 4th Most Visible Financial Institution Brand of the 
Year by the Institute of Brands Narrative Analysis. The 
Board, Management and Staff of ADB wish to dedicate 
these recognition and awards to our cherished customers, 
shareholders and other stakeholders for the loyalty and 
support.  
CONCLUSION
I could not be more proud of what our Bank achieved in 
2020 whilst acknowledging there is still more to do. The 
pandemic brought about many changes in banking, and 
we must embrace the opportunity to achieve a state of 
excellence in our risk management controls, services 
quality products and good customer service to our clients.
On behalf of the Board, Management and staff, I wish to 
express my profound gratitude to you, our shareholders, 
for their wonderful support during the year under review.                          
I also express my heartfelt appreciation to the employees 
of the Bank for their hard work, and to all stakeholders of 
the Bank for the services rendered that have culminated 
in our gains. My sincerest gratitude to our cherished 
customers for doing business with us and wish to let them 
know it is their loyalty and businesses that have kept us in 
sustained growth.
Thank you and God bless us all.34         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
REPORT OF THE AUDITOR
INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT TO 
THE SHAREHOLDERS OF AGRICULTURAL 
DEVELOPMENT BANK LIMITED
Report on the audit of the financial statements
Opinion 
We have audited the financial statements of the Agricultural 
Development Bank Limited (the Bank) set out on pages 38 
to 103, which comprise the statement of financial position 
as at 31 December 2020, the statement of profit or loss, 
the statement of comprehensive income, the statement of 
changes in equity and the statement of cash flows for the 
year then ended, and notes to the financial statements, 
including a summary of significant accounting policies. 
In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in 
all material respects, the financial position of the Bank as 
at 31 December 2020, and its financial performance and 
cash flows for the year then ended in accordance with 
International Financial Reporting Standards and also in the 
manner required by the provisions of the Companies Act, 
2019 (Act 992) and the Banks and Specialised Deposit-
Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).
Basis for Opinion
We conducted our audit in accordance with International 
Standards on Auditing (ISAs). Our responsibilities under 
those standards are further described in the Auditors’  
Responsibilities for the Audit of the Financial Statements 
section of our report. We are independent of the company in accordance with the International Code of Ethics 
for Professional Accountants (including International 
Independence Standards) (IESBA Code) together with 
the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of 
the financial statements in Ghana, and we have fulfilled 
our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these 
requirements and the IESBA Code. We believe that 
the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and 
appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Key Audit Matters
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our 
professional judgement, were of most significance in our 
audit of the financial statements of the current period. 
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit 
of the financial statements as a whole, and in forming our 
opinion thereon, and we do not provide a separate opinion 
on these matters. For each matter below, our description 
of how our audit addressed the matter is provided in that 
context. 
We have fulfilled the responsibilities described in the 
Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the financial 
statements section of our report, including in relation 
to these matters. Accordingly, our audit included the 
performance of procedures designed to respond to our 
assessment of the risks of material misstatement of the 
financial statements. The result of our audit procedures, 
including the procedures performed to address the 
matters below, provide the basis for our audit opinion on 
the accompanying financial statements.INDEPENDENT AUDITOR’S REPORT2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            35         Key Audit Matter How the matter was addressed in the audit
Allowance for expected credit losses on loans and advances to customers 
IFRS 9 introduced a forward-looking Expected Credit 
Loss (ECL) model. The ECL model is to reflect the 
general pattern of deterioration or improvement in the 
credit quality of financial instruments. The amount of 
ECL’s recognized as a loss allowance or provision 
depends on the extent of credit deterioration since 
the initial recognition. The recognition of impairment 
could be done on a 12-month expected credit losses 
or Lifetime expected credit losses. Impairment 
computations under IFRS 9 therefore involves the 
use of models that take into account:
• The probability-weighted outcome.
• Reasonable and supportable information that is        
available without undue cost or Loan loss provision is 
a key area of judgement for management. 
Significant judgements in the determination of the 
Bank’s Expected Credit Loss includes:
• Use of assumptions in determining ECL modelling 
parameters.
• Portfolio segmentation for ECL computation
• Determination of a significant increase credit risk     
  and 
• Determination of associations between    
macroeconomic scenarios.
The use of different models and assumptions can 
significantly affect the level of allowance for expected 
credit losses on loans and advances to customers. 
Due to the significance of such loans which account 
for about 60% of total assets of the bank, and the 
significant use of judgements, the assessment of the 
allowance for expected credit losses is a key audit 
matter.
A total amount of GH¢9,699,000 has been 
recorded in the statement of profit or loss and other 
comprehensive income for the year as a credit loss. 
The total impairment provision held as at 31 December 
2020 in accordance with IFRS 9 impairment rules 
was GH¢406,376,000.
Further disclosures relating to these amounts and 
the Bank’s accounting policies regarding estimating 
these ECLs have been disclosed in note 5.4 and note 
21 respectively of these financial statements.We have obtained an understanding of the Bank’s 
implementation process of IFRS 9, including 
understanding of the changes to the Bank’s IT 
systems, processes and controls. Additionally, we 
obtained an understanding of the credit risk modelling 
methodology.We validated and tested the ECL model 
of the Bank by assessing the data integrity and the 
internal controls around the model.We have also 
performed, among others, the following substantive 
audit procedures: 
• Reviewed the accounting policies and framework 
methodology developed by the Bank in order to 
assess its compliance with IFRS 9; 
• Verified sampled underlying contracts of financial 
assets to determine the appropriateness of 
management’s classification and measurement of 
these instruments in the ECL model 
• Reviewed and tested the methodology developed 
to calculate loan loss provision under IFRS 9, 
concentrating on aspects such as factors for 
determining a ‘significant increase in credit risk’, 
staging of loans, testing specific models related 
to Probability of Default (PD), Loss Given Default 
(LGD), Exposure at Default (EAD) 
• Tested the accuracy and completeness of data 
used in modelling the risk parameter,
• Recalculating the ECL, 
• Reviewed forward looking information / multiple 
economic scenario elements 
• For stage  3 exposures, we tested the 
reasonableness of the assumptions underlying 
the impairment identification and quantification 
including forecasts of future cash flows, valuation of 
underlying collateral, estimated period of realisation 
for collaterals, etc.
• We have also analysed information relating to the 
allowance for expected credit losses on loans and 
advances to customers disclosed in the notes to the 
financial statements of the Bank.36         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
Other Information
The directors are responsible for the other information. 
The other information comprises corporate information 
(Directors, Officials and Registered Office), report of the 
Directors and statement of directors’ responsibilities. Other 
information does not include the financial statements and 
our auditor’s report thereon. 
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover 
the other information and we do not express an audit 
opinion or any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements, 
our responsibility is to read the other information and, 
in doing so, consider whether the other information is 
materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our 
knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to 
be materially misstated. If, based on the work we have 
performed on the other information obtained prior to the 
date of this auditor’s report, we conclude that there is a 
material misstatement of this other information, we are 
required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in 
this regard. 
Responsibilities of the directors for the financial 
statements
The directors are responsible for the preparation and fair 
presentation of the financial statements in accordance 
with International Financial Reporting Standards and 
the requirements of the Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) 
and the and the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking 
Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930), and for such internal 
control as the directors determine is necessary to enable 
the preparation of financial statements that are free from 
material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements, the directors are 
responsible for assessing the Bank’s ability to continue 
as a going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters 
related to going concern and using the going concern 
basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to 
liquidate the Bank or to cease operations, or have no 
realistic alternative but to do so. 
Those charged with governance are responsible for 
overseeing the Bank’s financial reporting processes.
Auditors’ responsibilities for the audit of the 
financial statements
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about 
whether the financial statements as a whole are free from 
material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and 
to issue an auditor’s report that includes our opinion. 
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is 
not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance 
with ISAs will always detect a material misstatement when 
it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, 
they could reasonably be expected to influence the 
economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these 
financial statements. 
• As part of an audit in accordance with ISAs, we exercise 
professional judgement and maintain professional 
skepticism throughout the audit. We also:Identify 
and assess the risks of material misstatement of the 
financial statements, whether due to fraud or error, 
design and perform audit procedures responsive to 
those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient 
and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. 
The risk of not detecting a material misstatement 
resulting from fraud is higher than for one resulting 
from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, 
intentional omissions, misrepresentations, or the 
override of internal control. 
• Obtain an understanding of internal controls relevant 
to the audit in order to design audit procedures that 
are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the 
purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness 
of the Bank’s internal control.
• Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies 
used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates 
and related disclosures made by the directors. 
• Conclude on the appropriateness of the directors’ use 
of the going concern basis of accounting and based 
on the audit evidence obtained, whether a material 
uncertainty exists related to events or conditions 
that may cast significant doubt on the Bank’s ability 
to continue as a going concern.If we conclude that 
a material uncertainty exists, we are required to 
draw attention in our auditor’s report to the related 
disclosures in the financial statements or, if such 
disclosures are inadequate, to modify our opinion. Our 
conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained 
up to the date of our auditor’s report. However, future 
events or conditions may cause the Bank to cease to 
continue as a going concern.
• Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and 
content of the financial statements, including the 
disclosures, and whether the financial statements 
represent the underlying transactions and events in a 
manner that achieves fair presentation.
• Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding 
the financial information of the entities or business 
activities within the bank to express an opinion on 
the financial statements. We are responsible for the 
direction, supervision and performance of the Bank’s 
audit. We remain solely responsible for our audit 
opinion. 
We communicate with the directors regarding, among 
other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit 
and significant audit findings, including any significant 2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            37         deficiencies in internal controls that we identify during our 
audit. 
We also provide the directors with a statement that 
we have complied with relevant ethical requirements 
regarding independence, and to communicate with them 
all relationships and other matters that may reasonably 
be thought to bear on our independence, and where 
applicable, related safeguards. 
From the matters communicated with the directors, we 
determine those matters that were of most significance in 
the audit of the financial statements of the current period 
and are therefore the key audit matters. We describe these 
matters in our auditors’ report unless law or regulation 
precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, in 
extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a matter 
should not be communicated in our report because the 
adverse consequences of doing so would reasonably be 
expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such 
communication. 
Report on other legal requirements
The Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992) requires that in 
carrying out our audit we consider and report on the 
following matters.  We confirm that:
• We have obtained all the information and explanations 
which to the best of our knowledge and belief were 
necessary for the purposes of our audit;
• In our opinion, proper books of account have 
been kept by the Bank, so far as appears from our 
examination of those books; 
• Proper returns adequate for the purpose of our audit 
have been received from branches not visited by us; 
and
• The statement of financial position, the statement of 
profit and loss and the statement of comprehensive 
income are in agreement with the books of account 
and returns.• In our opinion, to the best of our information and 
according to the explanations given to us, the 
accounts give the information required under the Act, 
in the manner so required and give a true and fair 
view of the state of affairs of the company at the end 
of the financial year and of the profit or loss for the 
financial year then ended.
• We are independent of the Bank pursuant to section 
143 of the companies Act, 2019 (Act 992).
The Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions 
Act, 2016 (Act 930) under section 85(2) requires that we 
state certain matters in our audit report. Accordingly, we 
state that;
• The accounts give a true and fair view of the statement 
of affairs of the Bank and the results of operations for 
the year under review;
• We were able to obtain all the information and 
explanations required for the efficient performance of 
our duties;The transactions of the Bank are generally 
within the powers of the Bank;
• The Bank has generally complied with the provisions 
of the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking 
Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).
The Bank has generally complied with the provisions of 
the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2008 (Act 749), the Anti-
Terrorism Act, 2008 (Act 762) and regulations made under 
these enactments;
The engagement partner on the audit resulting in 
this independent auditors’ report is Victor Gborglah 
(ICAG/P/1151).
Ernst & Young (ICAG/F/2021/126)
Chartered Accountants
Accra, Ghana
Date: 31 March 2021
38         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS FOR THE 
YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2020
2020 2019
 Note GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Interest income 8 628,959 491,211 
Interest expense 9 (213,546) (191,115)
Net interest income 415,413 300,096
Fees and commission income 10 87,585 73,946 
Fees and commission expense 10 (12,171) (14,913)
Net fees and commission income 75,414  59,033 
Net trading income 11 52,612 50,382 
Other operating income 12 10,533 17,516 
Operating Income 553,972 427,027
Impairment loss on financial assets 13 (23,163) (15,614)
Personnel expenses 14 (233,468) (206,711)
Other operating expenses 15 (138,096) (133,545)
Depreciation and amortization 16 (61,556) (53,272)
Profit before tax 97,689 17,885
Income tax expense 24.1 (32,286) (3,061)
Profit after tax 65,403 14,824 
The notes on pages 44 to 103 form an integral part of these financial statements.2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            39         Note 2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Profit after tax 65,403 14,823
Other comprehensive income, net of tax of Items that will 
not be reclassified to profit or loss:
Fair value through Other Comprehensive Income 40(ii) (7,837) 4,737
Other comprehensive income for the year (7,837) 4,737
Total comprehensive income for the year 57,566 19,560
Earnings per share
Basic earnings per share (in Ghana pesewas) 17 18.85 5.7
Diluted earnings per share (in Ghana pesewas) 17             
18.854.3
The notes on pages 44 to 103 form an integral part of these financial statements.STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 202040         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
2020 2019
Assets Note GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cash and bank balances 18 755,756 927,086
Due from other banks 19 309,098 271,895
Investment securities 20 2,222,139 1,522,828
Loans and advances to customers 21 1,911,988 1,468,653
Investment (other than securities) 22 91,892 102,322
Corporate tax assets 24.2 2,399 5,634
Intangible assets 25 37,701 20,798
Other assets 26 61,742 67,379
Property and equipment 27 95,800 95,766
Right of use assets 28 183,525 36,408 
Deferred tax assets 24.4 43,754 58,890
Total Assets 5,715,794 4,577,659
Liabilities
Borrowed funds 30 313,173 277,618
Deposits from customers 31 4,281,037 3,392,209
Other liabilities 32 89,137 80,243
Lease Liability 33 181,824 34205
4,865,171 3,784,275
Equity
Stated capital 34 698,700 421,700
Deposit for shares                                                                                                                                        35 - 277,000
Accumulated losses 36 (252,236) (289,349)
Revaluation reserve 37 57,531 57,531
Statutory reserve 38 141,214 108,512
Credit risk reserve 39 153,088 157,827
Fair value through OCI 40 52,326 60,163
Shareholders’ funds 850,623 793,384
Total liabilities and Shareholders’ Funds 5,715,794 4,577,659
The notes on pages 44 to 103 form an integral part of these financial statements
These financial statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 29 March 2020 and signed on its behalf by:
CHAIRMAN                                                                                                                                                 DIRECT ORSTATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION 
AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2020
2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            41         STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR 
THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2020
In thousands of 
GH¢ Stated   
Capital Deposit 
for Shares Credit 
Risk 
ReserveStatutory 
reserveRevaluation 
ReserveOther 
ReservesAccumulated 
lossesTotal
Balance at 
1 January 2020421,700 277,000 157,827 108,512 57,531 60,163 (289,349) 793,384
Additional Capital
Transfer from 
deposit for 
shares to stated 
capital277,000 (277,000) - - - - - -
Profit for the year - - - - - - 65,403 65,403
Cost of Stamped 
duty - - - - - - (326) (326)
Other Comprehensive Income net of tax
Net Change 
in fair value 
of Equity 
Investments- - - - - (7,838) - (7,838)
Transfer from 
retained earnings 
to statutory 
reserve - - - 32,702 - - (32,702) -
Transfer (from) 
credit risk 
reserve- - (4,739) - - - 4,739 -
Balance at 31 
December 2020698,700 - 153,088 141,214 57,531 52,325 (252,235) 850,62342         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR 
THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2020
In thousands 
of GH¢ Stated 
Capital Deposit 
for 
Shares Credit 
Risk 
ReserveStatutory 
reserveRevaluation 
ReserveOther 
ReservesAccumulated 
lossesTotal
Balance at 
1 January 2019275,100 277,000 167,640 101,100 57,531 55,426 (294,086) 639,711
Additional Capital  -  - - - - - - -
Right Issue 146,600  - - - - - - 146,600
Profit for the year  -  - - - - - 14,823 14,823
Transaction costs 
related to Right 
Issue  -  - - - - - (12,487) (12,487)
 -  - - - - - - -
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income net of tax -  - - - - - - -
Net Change in fair 
value of Equity 
Investments -  - - - - 4,737 - 4,737
Transfer from 
retained earnings to 
statutory reserve  -  -  - 7,412 - - (7,412) -
Transfer (from) 
credit risk reserve- - (9,813) - - - 9,813 -
Balance at 
31 December 2019421,700 277,000 157,827 108,512 57,531 60,163 (289,349) 793,3842020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            43         STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS FOR 
THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2020
Note 2020 2019
GH¢'000 GH¢'000
Cash flows from operating activities
Profit before tax 97,689 17,885
Adjustment for non-cash items 50.1 (330,880) (202,210)
(Loss) before working capital changes (233,191) (184,325)
Changes in operating assets and liabilities 50.2 438,887 345,052
Interest Income received 542,903 467,110
Interest expense paid (201,558) (188,007)
Dividend Income 186 1,302
Taxes paid (NFSL) 24.2 (1,507) (1,703)
Income Tax Paid 24.2 (9,796) (9,796)
Net cash generated from operating activities 535,924 429,633
Cash flows from investing activities
Purchase of property and equipment 27 (12,751) (10,924)
Purchase  of medium and long term 
government securities(1,340,315) (98,334)
Redemption of medium and long term 
government securities 368,003
Proceeds from the sale of property and 
equipment27
- 395
Purchase of intangible assets 25 (25,882) (35)
Purchase of Shares from S.W.I.F.T - (145)
Net cash used in investing activities (1,010,945) (109,043)
Cash flows from financing activities
Payments in borrowed funds 30 (137,256) (150,475)
Receipts in borrowed funds 30 169,947 153,664
Payments of Principal portion of Lease liability 33 (34,660) (31,181)
Payments of right of use assets (17,008) 146,600
Transaction costs related to Right Issue - (12,487)
Net cash generated from financing activities (18,977) 106,121
Increase in cash and cash equivalents (493,998) 426,711
Cash and cash equivalents at 1 January 1,885,508 1,463,647
Effect of exchange rate fluctuation on cash held 983 (4,850)
Cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 29 1,392,493 1,885,508
The notes on pages 44 to 103 form an integral part of these financial statements44         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
31 DECEMBER 2020
1. REPORTING ENTITY
Agricultural Development Bank Limited (ADB) is a financial 
institution incorporated in Ghana.  The registered office 
and address of the Bank is Accra Financial Centre, 3rd 
Ambassadorial Development Area. The Bank is primarily 
involved in corporate banking, investment banking and 
retail banking. These financial statements are for an 
individual entity.The Bank is listed on the Ghana Stock 
Exchange.
2. BASIS OF ACCOUNTING AND CHANGES IN 
ACCOUNTING POLICIES
 a. Basis of preparation  
 
 The financial statements have been prepared on 
a historical cost basis  and equity instruments at 
fair value through  other comprehensive income 
(FVOCI) all of which have been measured at fair 
value.  
 These financial statements are presented in Ghana 
Cedi, which is the Bank’s functional currency. 
All amounts have been rounded to the nearest 
thousands, except when otherwise indicated.
 
 b. Statement of compliance
 The financial statements have been prepared in 
accordance with International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS) and in the manner required by 
the Companies Act 2019, (Act 992), and the Banks 
and Specialised Deposit–Taking Institutions Act, 
2016 (Act 930).
2.1. New and amended standards and interpretations
Amendments to IAS 1: Classification of Liabilities 
as Current or Non-current
In January 2020, the IASB issued amendments 
to paragraphs 69 to 76 of IAS 1 to specify the 
requirements for classifying liabilities as current or 
non-current. The amendments clarify:
• What is meant by a right to defer settlement
• That a right to defer must exist at the end of the 
reporting period
• That classification is unaffected by the likelihood 
that an entity will exercise its deferral right
• That only if an embedded derivative in a 
convertible liability is itself an equity instrument 
would the terms of a liability not impact its 
classification
The amendments are effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2023 and 
must be applied retrospectively. The Bank is currently 
assessing the impact the amendments will have on 
current practice and whether existing loan agreements 
may require renegotiation.Reference to the Conceptual Framework – 
Amendments to IFRS 3
In May 2020, the IASB issued Amendments to IFRS 3 
Business Combinations - Reference to the Conceptual 
Framework. The amendments are intended to replace 
a reference to the Framework for the Preparation 
and Presentation of Financial Statements, issued in 
1989, with a reference to the Conceptual Framework 
for Financial Reporting issued in March 2018 without 
significantly changing its requirements.
The Board also added an exception to the recognition 
principle of IFRS 3 to avoid the issue of potential ‘day 
2’ gains or losses arising for liabilities and contingent 
liabilities that would be within the scope of IAS 37 or 
IFRIC 21 Levies, if incurred separately.At the same 
time, the Board decided to clarify existing guidance 
in IFRS 3 for contingent assets that would not be 
affected by replacing the reference to the Framework 
for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial 
Statements.The amendments are effective for annual 
reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 
2022 and apply prospectively.
Property, Plant and Equipment: Proceeds before 
Intended Use – Amendments to IAS 16
In May 2020, the IASB issued Property, Plant and 
Equipment — Proceeds before Intended Use, which 
prohibits entities deducting from the cost of an item 
of property, plant and equipment, any proceeds from 
selling items produced while bringing that asset to the 
location and condition necessary for it to be capable 
of operating in the manner intended by management. 
Instead, an entity recognises the proceeds from 
selling such items, and the costs of producing those 
items, in profit or loss.
The amendment is effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022 and 
must be applied retrospectively to items of property, 
plant and equipment made available for use on or 
after the beginning of the earliest period presented 
when the entity first applies the amendment.
The amendments are not expected to have a material 
impact on the Bank.
Onerous Contracts – Costs of Fulfilling a 
Contract – Amendments to IAS 37
In May 2020, the IASB issued amendments to IAS 
37 to specify which costs an entity needs to include 
when assessing whether a contract is onerous or 
loss-making.
The amendments apply a “directly related cost 
approach”. The costs that relate directly to a contract 
to provide goods or services include both incremental 
costs and an allocation of costs directly related 
to contract activities. General and administrative 
costs do not relate directly to a contract and are 2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            45         excluded unless they are explicitly chargeable to the 
counterparty under the contract.
The amendments are effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022. The 
Bank will apply these amendments to contracts for 
which it has not yet fulfilled all its obligations at the 
beginning of the annual reporting period in which it 
first applies the amendments.
IFRS 1 First-time Adoption of International 
Financial Reporting Standards  – Subsidiary as a 
first-time adopter
As part of its 2018-2020 annual improvements to IFRS 
standards process, the IASB issued an amendment to 
IFRS 1 First-time Adoption of International Financial 
Reporting Standards. The amendment permits a 
subsidiary that elects to apply paragraph D16(a) of 
IFRS 1 to measure cumulative translation differences 
using the amounts reported by the parent, based on the 
parent’s date of transition to IFRS. This amendment is 
also applied to an associate or joint venture that elects 
to apply paragraph D16(a) of IFRS 1.
The amendment is effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022 with 
earlier adoption permitted.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments – Fees in the ’10 per 
cent’ test for derecognition of financial liabilities
As part of its 2018-2020 annual improvements to 
IFRS standards process the IASB issued amendment 
to IFRS 9. The amendment clarifies the fees that an 
entity includes when assessing whether the terms of 
a new or modified financial liability are substantially 
different from the terms of the original financial liability. 
These fees include only those paid or received 
between the borrower and the lender, including fees 
paid or received by either the borrower or lender on 
the other’s behalf. An entity applies the amendment to 
financial liabilities that are modified or exchanged on 
or after the beginning of the annual reporting period in 
which the entity first applies the amendment.
The amendment is effective for annual reporting 
periods beginning on or after 1 January 2022 with 
earlier adoption permitted. The Bank will apply the 
amendments to financial liabilities that are modified 
or exchanged on or after the beginning of the annual 
reporting period in which the entity first applies the 
amendment.
The amendments are not expected to have a material 
impact on the Bank.
IAS 41 Agriculture – Taxation in fair value 
measurements
As part of its 2018-2020 annual improvements to 
IFRS standards process the IASB issued amendment 
to IAS 41 Agriculture. The amendment removes the 
requirement in paragraph 22 of IAS 41 that entities 
exclude cash flows for taxation when measuring the 
fair value of assets within the scope of IAS 41.
An entity applies the amendment prospectively to fair 
value measurements on or after the beginning of the first annual reporting period beginning on or after 1 
January 2022 with earlier adoption permitted.
The amendments are not expected to have a material 
impact on the Bank.
Amendments to IFRS 3: Definition of a Business
The amendment to IFRS 3 Business Combinations 
clarifies that to be considered a business, an 
integrated set of activities and assets must include, at 
a minimum, an input and a substantive process that, 
together, significantly contribute to the ability to create 
output. Furthermore, it clarifies that a business can 
exist without including all of the inputs and processes 
needed to create outputs. These amendments had no 
impact on the financial statements of the Company 
but may impact future periods should the Company 
enter into any business combinations.
Amendments to IFRS 7, IFRS 9 and IAS 39 Interest 
Rate Benchmark Reform
The amendments to IFRS 9 and IAS 39 Financial 
Instruments: Recognition and Measurement provide 
a number of reliefs, which apply to all hedging 
relationships that are directly affected by interest 
rate benchmark reform. A hedging relationship is 
affected if the reform gives rise to uncertainty about 
the timing and/or amount of benchmark-based cash 
flows of the hedged item or the hedging instrument. 
These amendments have no impact on the financial 
statements of the Company as it does not have any 
interest rate hedge relationships.
Amendments to IAS 1 and IAS 8 Definition of Material
The amendments provide a new definition of material 
that states, “information is material if omitting, 
misstating or obscuring it could reasonably be 
expected to influence decisions that the primary users 
of general purpose financial statements make on the 
basis of those financial statements, which provide 
financial information about a specific reporting entity.” 
The amendments clarify that materiality will depend 
on the nature or magnitude of information, either 
individually or in combination with other information, in 
the context of the financial statements. A misstatement 
of information is material if it could reasonably be 
expected to influence decisions made by the primary 
users. These amendments had no impact on the 
financial statements of, nor is there expected to be 
any future impact to the Company.
Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting issued 
on 29 March 2018The Conceptual Framework is not a 
standard, and none of the concepts contained therein 
override the concepts or requirements in any standard. 
The purpose of the Conceptual Framework is to assist 
the IASB in developing standards, to help preparers 
develop consistent accounting policies where there is 
no applicable standard in place and to assist all parties 
to understand and interpret the standards. This will 
affect those entities which developed their accounting 
policies based on the Conceptual Framework. The 
revised Conceptual Framework includes some new 
concepts, updated definitions and recognition criteria 
for assets and liabilities and clarifies some important 46         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
concepts. These amendments had no impact on the 
financial statements of the Company.
Amendments to IFRS 16 Covid-19 Related Rent 
Concessions
On 28 May 2020, the IASB issued Covid-19-Related 
Rent Concessions - amendment to IFRS 16 Leases
The amendments provide relief to lessees from 
applying IFRS 16 guidance on lease modification 
accounting for rent concessions arising as a direct 
consequence of the Covid-19 pandemic. As a practical 
expedient, a lessee may elect not to assess whether 
a Covid-19 related rent concession from a lessor is a 
lease modification. A lessee that makes this election 
accounts for any change in lease payments resulting 
from the Covid-19 related rent concession the same 
way it would account for the change under IFRS 16, if 
the change were not a lease modification.
The amendment applies to annual reporting periods 
beginning on or after 1 June 2020. Earlier application 
is permitted. This amendment had no impact on the 
financial statements of the Company.
3.   SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING                              
      POLICIES
The following are the principal accounting policies 
adopted by the company in the preparation of these 
financial statements. 
These accounting policies have been applied 
consistently in dealing with items that are considered 
to be material to the Company’s
The Bank has consistently applied the following 
accounting policies to all periods presented in these 
financial statements.
Set out below is an index of the significant accounting 
policies, the details of which are available on the 
pages that follow. 
a. Foreign currency transaction
b. Interest income and expense
c. Fee and commission
d. Net trading income
e. Dividend income
f. Leases
g. Income tax
h. Financial assets and financial liabilities
i. Fair value measurement
j. Cash and cash equivalents
k. Investment securities
l. Property and equipment
m. Intangible assets 
n. Impairment of non-financial assets
o. Deposits and due to other banksp. Provisions
q. Financial guarantees and loan commitments
r. Fiduciary activities
s. Employee benefits
t. Stated capital and reserves 
u. Earnings per share
v. Investment in associates
w. Operating segments
a. Foreign currency transaction
Transactions in foreign currencies are translated 
into the functional currency using exchange rates 
prevailing at the dates of the transactions.  Monetary 
assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies 
are re-translated at closing inter-bank mid rates ruling 
at the reporting date.  Non-monetary items that are 
measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign 
currency are translated at exchange rates ruling at 
the dates of initial recognition.  Non-monetary items 
denominated in a foreign currency that are measured 
at fair value are translated at exchange rates ruling at 
the date when fair value was determined.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from 
the settlement of foreign currency transactions and 
from re-translation at year-end exchange rates of 
foreign currency denominated monetary assets and 
liabilities are recognized in profit or loss, except for 
differences on translation of equity investments in 
respect of which an election has been made to present 
subsequent changes in fair value and differences 
arising on translation of equity investments in other 
comprehensive income.
All foreign exchange gains and losses recognized in 
profit or loss are presented net within the corresponding 
item. Foreign exchange gains and losses on other 
comprehensive income items are presented in other 
comprehensive income within the corresponding item.
These financial statements are presented in Ghana 
Cedi, which is the Bank’s functional currency. All 
amounts have been rounded to the nearest thousands, 
except when otherwise indicated.
b. Interest income and expense
Interest income and expense for all interest-bearing 
financial instruments are recognised within ‘interest 
income’ and ‘interest expense’ in profit or loss using 
the effective interest method.
The effective interest method is a method of 
calculating the amortised cost of a financial asset 
or a financial liability and allocating interest income 
or interest expense over the relevant period. The 
effective interest rate is the rate that exactly discounts 
estimated future cash payments or receipts through 
the expected life of the financial instrument or, when 
appropriate, a shorter period to the net carrying 
amount of the financial asset or financial liability.  
When calculating the effective interest rate, the Bank 
estimates cash flows considering all contractual terms 2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            47         of the financial instrument, including prepayment 
options, but does not consider future credit losses.  
The calculation includes all fees and points paid or 
received between parties to the contract that are an 
integral part of the effective interest rate, transaction 
costs and all other premiums or discounts.
c. Fees and commissions
Fee and commission income and expense that are 
integral to the effective interest rate on afinancial 
asset or financial liability are included in the effective 
interest rate . Other fee and commission income 
– including account servicing fees, investment 
management fees, sales commission, placement fees 
and syndication fees – is recognised as the related 
services are performed. If a loan commitment is not 
expected to result in the draw-down of a loan, then 
the related loan commitment fee is recognised on 
a straight-line basis over the commitment period. A 
contract with a customer that results in a recognised 
financial instrument in the Bank’s financial statements 
may be partially in the scope of IFRS 9 and partially 
in the scope of IFRS 15. If this is the case, then the 
Bank first applies IFRS 9 to separate and measure the 
part of the contract that is in the scope of IFRS 9 and 
then applies IFRS 15 to the residual. Other fee and 
commission expenses relate mainly to transaction 
and service fees, which are expensed as the services 
are received.
d. Net trading income
Net trading income comprises gains less losses 
relating to trading assets and liabilities, including 
realised and unrealised fair value changes, interest 
and foreign exchange differences.
e. Dividend income
Dividend income is recognized in profit or loss when 
the Bank’s right to payment income is established.
f. Leases
The Company assesses at contract inception whether 
a contract is, or contains, a lease. That is, if the 
contract conveys the right to control the use of an 
identified asset for a period of time in exchange for 
consideration.   
The Company applies a single recognition and 
measurement approach for all leases, except for 
short-term leases and leases of low-value assets. The 
company recognises lease liabilities to make lease 
payments and right-of-use assets representing the 
right to use the underlying assets. 
Right-of-use assets 
The Company recognises right-of-use assets at the 
commencement date of the lease (i.e., the date the 
underlying asset is available for use). Right-of-use 
assets are measured at cost, less any accumulated 
depreciation and impairment losses, and adjusted 
for any remeasurement of lease liabilities. Low 
value assets and short term leases are classified as 
operating leases and are not recognized in the Bank’s statement of financial position. These leases are 
recognised on a straight-line basis.
Lease liabilities
At the commencement date of the lease, the Company 
recognises lease liabilities measured at the present 
value of lease payments to be made over the lease 
term. The lease payments include fixed payments 
(less any lease incentives receivable), variable lease 
payments that depend on an index or a rate, and 
amounts expected to be paid under residual value 
guarantees. The lease payments also include the 
exercise price of a purchase option reasonably certain 
to be exercised by the Company and payments of 
penalties for terminating the lease, if the lease term 
reflects exercising the option to terminate. Variable 
lease payments that do not depend on an index or 
a rate are recognised as expenses in the period in 
which the event or condition that triggers the payment 
occurs.
g. Income Tax
Income tax expense comprises current and deferred 
tax. Income tax expense is recognized in profit or loss 
except to the extent that it relates to items recognized 
in equity or OCI.
Current tax is the expected tax on tax payable on 
taxable income for the period, using tax rates enacted 
or substantively enacted at the reporting date.
Deferred tax is recognized in respect of temporary 
differences between the carrying amount of assets 
and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the 
amounts used for taxation purposes.  Deferred tax is 
not recognized for the following temporary differences: 
the initial recognition of goodwill, the initial recognition 
of assets and liabilities in a transaction that is not 
a business combination and that affects neither 
accounting nor taxable profit.
Deferred tax is measured at the tax rates that are 
expected to be applied to the temporary differences 
when reversed, based on laws that have been 
enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting 
date.  A deferred tax asset is recognized only to the 
extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will 
be available against which the asset can be utilized.  
Deferred tax assets are reviewed at each reporting 
date and are reduced to the extent that it is no longer 
probable that the related tax benefit will be realized.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset if there is a 
legally enforceable right to offset current tax liabilities 
and assets, and they relate to taxes levied by the 
same tax authority on the same taxable entity, or on 
different tax entities, but they intend to settle current 
tax liabilities and assets on a net basis or the tax 
assets and liabilities will be realised simultaneously.
h. Financial assets and financial liabilities
i. Recognition
The Bank initially recognises loans and advances, 
deposits, debt securities issued on the date on which 
they are originated. All other financial instruments 48         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
(including regular-way purchases and sales of financial 
assets) are recognised on the trade date, which is 
the date on which the Bank becomes a party to the 
contractual provisions of the instrument. A financial 
asset or financial liability is measured initially at fair 
value plus, for an item not at FVTPL, transaction costs 
that are directly attributable to its acquisition or issue. 
ii.    Classification
Financial assets 
The classification of financial instruments at initial 
recognition depends on their contractual terms and 
the business model for managing the instruments. 
Financial instruments are initially measured at their 
fair value, except in the case of financial assets and 
financial liabilities recorded at FVPL, transaction costs 
are added to, or subtracted from, this amount. Trade 
receivables are measured at the transaction price. 
When the fair value of financial instruments at initial 
recognition differs from the transaction price, the Bank 
accounts for the Day 1 profit or loss.
The Bank classifies all of its financial assets based on 
the business model for managing the assets and the 
asset’s contractual terms, measured at either:  
• Amortised cost
• FVOCI
• FVTPL
Due from banks, Loans and advances to 
customers, Financial investments at amortised 
cost   
The Bank measures Due from banks, Loans 
and advances to customers and other financial 
investments at amortised cost only if both of the 
following conditions are met:  
• The financial asset is held within a business 
model with the objective to hold financial assets 
in order to collect contractual cash flows  
• The contractual terms of the financial asset 
give rise on specified dates to cash flows that 
are solely payments of principal and interest 
(SPPI) on the principal amount outstanding  
The details of these conditions are outlined below.
Business model assessment  
The Bank determines its business model at the level 
that best reflects how it manages groups of financial 
assets to achieve its business objective:   
• The risks that affect the performance of the 
business model (and the financial assets held 
within that business model) and, in particular, 
the way those risks are managed.  
• How managers of the business are 
compensated (for example, whether the 
compensation is based on   the fair value of 
the assets managed or on the contractual 
cash flows collected). The expected frequency, value and timing of sales are 
also important aspects of the Bank’s assessment. The 
business model assessment is based on reasonably 
expected scenarios without taking ‘worst case’ or 
‘stress case’ scenarios into account. If cash flows after 
initial recognition are realised in a way that is different 
from the  Bank’s original expectations, the Bank does 
not change the classification of the remaining financial 
assets held  in that business model, but incorporates 
such information when assessing newly originated or 
newly purchased financial assets going forward. 
The SPPI test  
As a second step of its classification process the Bank 
assesses the contractual terms of the financial asset 
to identify whether they meet the SPPI test.
‘Principal’ for the purpose of this test is defined as the 
fair value of the financial asset at initial recognition 
and  may change over the life of the financial asset 
(for example, if there are repayments of principal or 
amortisation  of the premium/discount).
The most significant elements of interest within a 
lending arrangement are typically the consideration 
for the time value of money and credit risk. To make 
the SPPI assessment, the Bank applies judgement 
and considers relevant factors such as the currency 
in which the financial asset is denominated, and the 
period for which the interest rate is set. 
In contrast, contractual terms that introduce a more 
than de minimis exposure to risks or volatility in the  
contractual cash flows that are unrelated to a basic 
lending arrangement do not give rise to contractual 
cash  flows that are solely payments of principal and 
interest on the amount outstanding. In such cases, the 
financial asset is required to be measured at FVPL. 
Financial assets that are held for trading or managed 
and whose performance is evaluated on a fair value 
basis are measured at FVTPL because they are 
neither held to collect contractual cash flows nor 
held both to collect contractual cash flows and to sell 
financial assets. 
On initial recognition of an equity investment that is 
not held for trading, the Bank may irrevocably elect 
to present subsequent changes in fair value in OCI. 
This election is made on an investment-by-investment 
basis. All other financial assets are classified as 
measured at FVTPL. In addition, on initial recognition, 
the Bank may irrevocably designate a financial asset 
that otherwise meets the requirements to be measured 
at amortised cost or at FVOCI as at FVTPL if doing 
so eliminates or significantly reduces an accounting 
mismatch that would otherwise arise.
i. Fair value measurement
Fair value’ is the price that would be received to 
sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an 
orderly transaction between market participants 
at the measurement date in the principal or, in its 
absence, the most advantageous market to which 
the Bank has access at that date. The fair value of 2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            49         a liability reflects its non-performance risk. When 
one is available, the Bank measures the fair value 
of an instrument using the quoted price in an active 
market for that instrument. A market is regarded as 
‘active’ if transactions for the asset or liability take 
place with sufficient frequency and volume to provide 
pricing information on an ongoing basis. If there is 
no quoted price in an active market, then the Bank 
uses valuation techniques that maximise the use of 
relevant observable inputs and minimise the use of 
unobservable inputs. The chosen valuation technique 
incorporates all of the factors that market participants 
would take into account in pricing a transaction. The 
best evidence of the fair value of a financial instrument 
on initial recognition is normally the transaction price 
– i.e. the fair value of the consideration given or 
received. If the Bank determines that the fair value 
on initial recognition differs from the transaction price 
and the fair value is evidenced neither by a quoted 
price in an active market for an identical asset or 
liability nor based on a valuation technique for which 
any unobservable inputs are judged to be insignificant 
in relation to the measurement, then the financial 
instrument is initially measured at fair value, adjusted 
to defer the difference between the fair value on initial 
recognition and the transaction price. Subsequently, 
that difference is recognised in profit or loss on an 
appropriate basis over the life of the instrument but 
no later than when the valuation is wholly supported 
by observable market data or the transaction is closed 
out. If an asset or a liability measured at fair value has 
a bid price and an ask price, then the Bank measures 
assets and long positions at a bid price and liabilities 
and short positions at an ask price.
j.   Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents include notes and coins 
on hand, unrestricted balances held with central 
banks and highly liquid financial assets with original 
maturities of three months or less from the date of 
acquisition that are subject to an insignificant risk of 
changes in their fair value, and are used by the Bank 
in the management of its short-term commitments. 
Cash and cash equivalents are carried at amortised 
cost in the statement of financial position.
For the purposes of the statement of cash flows, cash 
equivalents include short term liquid investments 
which are readily convertible into known amounts of 
cash and which were within three months of maturity 
when acquired.
k. Investment securities
The ‘investment securities’ caption in the statement 
of financial position includes: equity investment 
securities designated as at FVOCI.
When equity instruments are measured at FVOCI, 
gains and losses on such equity instruments are 
never reclassified to profit or loss and no impairment is 
recognised in profit or loss. Dividends are recognised 
in profit or loss unless they clearly represent a recovery 
of part of the cost of the investment, in which case they are recognised in OCI. Cumulative gains and 
losses recognised in OCI are transferred to retained 
earnings on disposal of an investment.
l.  Property and equipment 
i.    Recognition and measurement
Items of property and equipment are measured at cost 
less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated 
impairment losses or as professionally revalued from 
time to time less accumulated depreciation. Cost 
includes expenditure that are directly attributable to the 
acquisition of the asset. The cost of self -constructed 
assets includes the cost of materials and direct 
labour, any other costs directly attributable to bringing 
the assets to a working condition for their intended 
use, the costs of dismantling and removing the items 
and restoring the site on which they are located, and 
capitalised borrowing costs. 
Land and building are measured at fair value. Changes 
in fair value are recorded in OCI and credited to the 
asset revaluation surplus in equity. However, to the 
extent that it reverses a revaluation deficit of the 
same asset previously recognised in profit or loss, the 
increase is recognised in profit and loss. A revaluation 
deficit is recognised in the statement of profit or loss, 
except to the extent that it offsets an existing surplus 
on the same asset recognised in the asset revaluation 
surplus. Revaluation are performed on a regular basis. 
Accumulated depreciation as at the revaluation date 
is eliminated against the gross carrying amount of the 
asset and the net amount is restated to the revalued 
amount of the asset. Upon disposal, any revaluation 
surplus relating to the particular asset being sold is 
transferred to retained earnings.
Purchased intangible that is integral to the functionality 
of the related equipment is capitalised as part of that 
equipment.
Increases in the carrying amount arising on revaluation 
are credited to a revaluation surplus. Decreases 
that offset previous increases of the same asset are 
charged against the revaluation surplus. All other 
decreases are charged to profit or loss.
When parts of an item of property or equipment 
have different useful lives, they are accounted for as 
separate items (major components) of property and 
equipment. 
Capital Work in Progress is carried at cost less 
accumulated impairment.
The gain or loss on disposal of an item of property and 
equipment is determined by comparing the proceeds 
from disposal with the carrying amount of the item of 
property and equipment and is recognised in other 
income/other expenses in profit or loss.
Subsequent costsThe cost of replacing part of an 
item of property or equipment is recognised in the 
carrying amount of the item if it is probable that the 
future economic benefits embodied within the part will 50         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
flow to the Bank and its cost can be measured reliably. 
The costs of the day-to-day servicing of property and 
equipment are recognised in profit or loss as incurred.
i. Depreciation
Depreciation is calculated over the depreciable 
amount, which is the cost of the asset, or other 
amount substituted for cost, less its residual value.  
Depreciation is recognised in profit or loss on a straight-
line basis over its expected useful lives of each part 
of an item or property and equipment, since this most 
closely reflects the expected pattern consumption of 
the future economic benefits embodied in the asset.  
Land is not depreciated.
The estimated useful lives for the current and 
comparative periods are as follows: 
Buildings                    20 years
Motor vehicles                   4 years
Furniture and equipment     5 years
Computers                    5 years
Leasehold Improvement      lower of the estimated               
                    useful life and the lease  
                                            tenor
Depreciation methods, useful lives and residual values 
are reassessed at each reporting date and adjusted if 
appropriate.
m. Intangible assets
Computer intangible
Intangible assets comprise computer intangible.  
Intangible acquired by the Bank is measured at cost 
less accumulated amortization and any accumulated 
impairment losses.
Subsequent expenditure on intangible is capitalized 
only when it increases future economic benefits 
embodied in the specific asset to which it relates.  All 
other expenditure is expensed as incurred.
Intangible is amortized on a straight-line basis and 
recognized in profit or loss over its estimated useful 
life, from the date that it is available for use.  The 
estimated useful life of intangible for the current and 
comparative periods is five years. 
Amortization methods, useful lives and residual values 
are reviewed at each reporting date and adjusted, if 
appropriate.
n. Impairment of non-financial assets
The carrying amounts of the Bank’s non-financial 
assets other than corporate tax assets and deferred 
tax assets, are reviewed at each reporting date 
to determine whether there is any indication of 
impairment. If any such indication exists then 
the asset’s recoverable amount is estimated.  An 
impairment loss is recognised if the carrying amount 
of an asset or its cash-generating unit exceeds its recoverable amount.  A cash-generating unit is the 
smallest identifiable asset that generates cash flows 
that are largely independent from other assets.  
Impairment losses are recognised in profit or loss. 
Impairment losses recognised in respect of cash 
generating units are allocated first to reduce the 
carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the units 
and then to reduce the carrying amount of the other 
assets in the unit (group of units) on a pro rata basis.
The recoverable amount of an asset or cash-
generating unit is the greater of its value in use and 
its fair value less costs to sell.  In assessing value in 
use, the estimated future cash flows are discounted to 
their present value using a pre-tax discount rate that 
reflects current market assessments of the time value 
of money and the risks specific to the asset.
In respect of other assets, impairment losses 
recognised in prior periods are assessed at each 
reporting date for any indications that the loss has 
decreased or no longer exists.  An impairment loss is 
reversed if there has been a change in the estimates 
used to determine the recoverable amount. An 
impairment loss is reversed only to the extent that the 
asset’s carrying amount does not exceed the carrying 
amount that would have been determined, net of 
depreciation or amortisation, if no impairment loss 
had been recognized.
o. Deposits and borrowed funds
Deposits and borrowings from other banks are the 
Bank’s sources of debt funding. The Bank classifies 
capital instruments as financial liabilities or equity 
instruments in accordance with the substance of the 
contractual terms of the instrument.
Deposits and borrowings from other banks are initially 
measured at fair value plus transaction costs, and 
subsequently measured at their amortised cost using 
the effective interest method, except where the Bank 
chooses to carry the liabilities at fair value through 
profit or loss.
p. Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Bank has a 
present legal or constructive obligation as a result of 
past events that can be reliably estimated and it is 
probable that an outflow of resources will be required 
to settle the obligation. Restructuring provisions 
comprise lease termination penalties and employee 
termination payments.  Provisions are not recognised 
for future operating losses.
Where there are a number of similar obligations which 
are likely to result in an outflow to settle related classes 
of obligations as a whole, a provision is recognised 
even if the likelihood of an outflow with respect to any 
one item included in the same class of obligations 
may be small.
Provisions are measured at the present value of 
expenditures expected to be required to settle 
obligations using pre-tax rates that reflect current 
market assessments of the time value of money and 2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            51         risks specific to the obligation.  An increase in the 
provision due to passage of time is recognised as an 
interest expense.
q. Financial guarantee and loan commitments
Financial guarantees are initially recognised in the 
financial statements (within Other Liabilities) at fair 
value, being the premium received. Subsequent to 
initial recognition, the Bank’s liability under each 
guarantee is measured at the higher of the amount 
initially recognised less cumulative amortisation 
recognised in the income statement, and an ECL 
allowance as set out in Note 41.1. 
The premium received is recognised in the income 
statement in Net fees and commission income on a 
straight-line basis over the life of the guarantee.
Undrawn loan commitments and letters of credits are 
commitments under which, over the duration of the 
commitment, the Bank is required to provide a loan 
with pre-specified terms to the customer. Similar to 
financial guarantee contracts, these contracts are in 
the scope of the ECL requirements.
The nominal contractual value of financial guarantees, 
letters of credit and undrawn loan commitments, where 
the loan agreed to be provided is on market terms, are 
not recorded on in the statement of financial position.  
The nominal values of these instruments together with 
the corresponding ECL are disclosed in Note 41.1.
r. Fiduciary activities
The Bank acts as trustees and in other fiduciary 
capacities that result in the holding or placing of 
assets on behalf of individuals, trusts, retirement 
benefit plans and other institutions.  These assets 
and income arising thereon are excluded from these 
financial statements, as they are not assets of the 
Bank.
s.  Employee benefits
Retirement benefit cost
The Bank contributes to the statutory Social Security 
& National Insurance Trust (SSNIT). This is a defined 
contribution scheme registered under the National 
Social Security Act.  The Bank’s obligations under the 
scheme are limited to specific contributions legislated 
from time to time and are currently limited to a 
maximum of 13% of an employee’s basic salary per 
month. The Bank also operates a defined contribution 
benefit scheme for its employees.  
The assets of this scheme are held by the treasury 
department of the Bank.  The scheme is funded by 
contributions from both the employees and employer.  
Benefits are paid to retiring staff in accordance with 
the scheme rules. The Bank’s obligations to staff 
retirement benefit schemes are charged to the profit 
or loss in the year to which they relate.
 Provision for employee entitlement
Employee entitlements to annual leave are recognised 
when they accrue to employees.  A provision is made 
for the estimated liability for annual leave accrued at 
the year end.  Short-term Employment benefits
Short-term employee benefit obligations are measured 
on an undiscounted basis and are expensed as the 
related service is provided.  A provision is recognized 
for the amount expected to be paid under short-term 
cash bonus or profit-sharing plans, if the bank has 
a present legal or constructive obligation to pay this 
amount as a result of past service provided by the 
employee and the obligation can be estimated reliably.
 Long service awards
The bank has other long-term employee benefits 
scheme in the form a long service award for its 
employees.  These are long service awards which 
accrue to employees based on graduated periods 
of uninterrupted service.  These awards accrue 
over the service life of employees.  Employees 
leaving the service of the bank after 5 years through 
retirement (both voluntary and compulsory) or 
resignation become eligible for these awards based 
on their current entitlement at the time of retirement or 
resignation based on their length of service. The bank 
has no further obligation after the staff exits the bank. 
The benefits are unfunded.
t.   Stated capital and reserves
 i.   Share capital
The Bank classifies capital and equity instruments 
in accordance with the contractual terms of the 
instrument.  The Bank’s share capital is not redeemable 
by holders in the normal course of business and bears 
an entitlement to distributions that is non-cumulative 
and at the discretion of the Directors.  Accordingly, 
they are presented as a component of issued capital 
within equity.
ii.   Share issue costs
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of 
an equity instrument are deducted from equity.
iii.   Dividend on ordinary shares
Dividends on ordinary shares are recognized in the 
period in which they are approved by the shareholders.  
Dividend proposed which is yet to be approved by 
shareholders, is disclosed by way of notes. 
iv.   Statutory reserves
Statutory reserves are based on the requirements of 
section 34(i) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit–
Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930). Transfers into 
statutory reserves are made in accordance with the 
relationship between the Bank’s reserve fund and its 
paid-up capital, which determines the proportion of 
profits for the period that should be transferred.
v.   Credit risk reserves
This is a reserve created to set aside the excess or 
shortfalls between amounts recognized as impairment 
loss on loans and advances based on provisions made 
for bad and doubtful loans and advances calculated 
in accordance with IFRS and the Central Bank’s 
prudential guidelines.52         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
u. Earnings per share
The Bank presents basic earnings per share (EPS) 
data for its ordinary shares. Basic EPS is calculated 
by dividing the profit or loss attributable to ordinary 
shareholders of the Bank by the weighted average 
number of ordinary shares outstanding during the 
year.
v. Investment in Associates 
      (equity – accounted investees)
Associates are those entities in which the Bank has 
significant influence but not control or joint control, 
over the financial and operating policies. Interests in 
associates are accounted for using the equity method. 
They are recognized initially at cost, which includes 
transaction costs. Subsequent to initial recognition, 
the financial statements include the Bank’s share 
of the profit or loss and OCI of equity-accounted 
investees, until the date on which significant influence 
ceases.
w. Operating Segments
A segment is a distinguishable component of the 
Bank that is engaged either in providing products or 
services (business segment), or in providing products 
or services within a particular economic environment 
(geographical segment), which is subject to risks 
and rewards that are different from those of other 
segments.
The Bank’s primary format for segment reporting is 
based on business segments. 
The Bank has the following main business segments:
• Corporate Banking: includes loans, deposits and 
other transactions and balances with corporate 
customers including the Agricultural sector.
• Retail Banking: includes loans, deposits and other 
transactions and balances with retail customers.
• Central Treasury: undertakes the Bank’s funding 
and centralised risk management activities 
through borrowings, issues of debt securities, 
use of derivatives for risk management purposes 
and investing in liquid assets such as short-term 
placements and corporate and government debt 
securities.
4.   SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING JUDGEMENTS,  
      ESTIMATES AND ASSUMPTIONS
The preparation of the Bank’s financial statements 
requires management to make judgements, estimates 
and assumptions that affect the reported amount of 
revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities,and the 
accompanying disclosures, as well as the disclosure 
of contingent liabilities. Uncertainty about these 
assumptions and estimates could result in outcomes 
that require a material adjustment to the carrying 
amount of assets or liabilities affected in future periods.
In the process of applying the Bank’s accounting 
policies, management has made the following 
judgements and assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty at the 
reporting date, that have a significant risk of causing 
a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of 
assets and liabilities within the next financial year. 
Existing circumstances and assumptions about future 
developments may change due to circumstances 
beyond the Bank’s control and are reflected in the 
assumptions if and when they occur. Items with the 
most significant effect on the amounts recognised in 
the financial statements with substantial management 
judgement and/or estimates are collated below with 
respect to judgements/estimates involved.
4.1. Impairment losses on financial assets
The measurement of impairment losses both under 
IFRS 9 across all categories of financial assets 
requires judgement, in particular, the estimation of the 
amount and timing of future cash flows and collateral 
values when determining impairment losses and the 
assessment of a significant increase in credit risk. 
These estimates are driven by a number of factors, 
changes in which can result in different levels of 
allowances.
The Bank’s ECL calculations are outputs of complex 
models with a number of underlying assumptions 
regarding the choice of variable inputs and their 
interdependencies. Elements of the ECL models that 
are considered accounting judgements and estimates 
include:
• The Bank’s internal credit grading model, which 
assigns PDs to the individual grades
• The Bank’s criteria for assessing if there has 
been a significant increase in credit risk and 
so allowances for financial assets should be 
measured on a LTECL basis and the qualitative 
assessment 
• The segmentation of financial assets when their 
ECL is assessed on a collective basis
• Development of ECL models, including the 
various formulas and the choice of inputs
• Determination of associations between 
macroeconomic scenarios and, economic inputs, 
such as unemployment levels and collateral 
values, and the effect on PDs, EADs and LGDs
• Selection of forward-looking macroeconomic 
scenarios and their probability weightings, to 
derive the economic inputs into the ECL models.
5.   FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
5.1  Introduction and overview
The Bank’s activities expose it to a variety of financial 
risks and those activities involve the analysis, 
evaluation, acceptance and management of some 
degree of risk or combination of risks. Taking risk is 
core to the Bank’s business, and the operational risks 
are an inevitable consequence of being in business. 
The Bank’s aim is therefore to achieve an appropriate 
balance between risk and return and minimize 
potential adverse effects on its financial performance. 2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            53         The most important types of risk include:
• Operational risk
• Credit risk
• Liquidity risk
• Market risk - includes currency, interest rate and 
other price risk
5.2  Risk management framework
The Board of Directors has overall responsibility 
for the establishment and oversight of the Bank’s 
risk management framework. The board has 
established Board Audit and Risk Committees and 
a risk department to assist in the discharge of this 
responsibility. The board has also established the 
Credit Committee which is responsible for developing 
and monitoring risk management in their respective 
areas.
The Bank’s risk management policies are established 
to identify and analyse the risks faced by the Bank, to 
set appropriate risk limits and controls, and to monitor 
risks and adherence to limits. Risk management 
policies and systems are reviewed regularly to reflect 
changes in market conditions, products and services 
offered.
The Bank, through its training and management 
standards and procedures, aims to develop a 
disciplined and constructive control environment, 
in which all employees understand their roles and 
obligations.
The Bank’s Audit and Risk Management Committees 
are responsible for monitoring compliance with the 
Bank’s risk management policies and procedures, and 
for reviewing the adequacy of the risk management 
framework in relation to the risks faced by the Bank.  
The Audit and Risk Management Committees are 
assisted in these functions by Internal Audit and 
the Risk Management departments.  Internal Audit 
undertakes both regular and ad-hoc reviews of risk 
management controls and procedures, the results of 
which are reported to the Board Audit Committee.
The Bank has a Risk Management department 
organised into credit control, recoveries and 
operational control.  Under the credit control 
department, it has credit administration, credit risk 
appraisal and credit monitoring.  The department is 
responsible for managing all risks to which the Bank 
is exposed (operational risk, credit risk, liquidity risk, 
interest rate risk and foreign currency risk.)  The 
risk management department is developing a risk 
management framework for the Bank.
The Bank treats all branches as independent 
business units which generate their own income, run 
their ownprofit or loss statement and statement of 
financial position.  The head office consolidates these 
andexercises oversight responsibility over all the 
branches.  Credit is generated at the branch level and 
is then channeled through the credit control unit of 
the risk management department where a credit risk 
appraisal is performed to assess whether to engage 
the client or not.The client’s file is then moved to the head of risk 
management and to the other appropriate levels 
(credit committee, board and so on) for final approval 
before credit is granted.  There is also the monitoring 
aspect where the head office credit monitoring team 
monitors the loans and their performance in addition 
to the monitoring performed at the branch level.  
Where a loan goes beyond current, it is classified 
as either OLEM, substandard, doubtful or loss, as 
recommended by the Central Bank of Ghana.  Where 
a loan goes beyond current, there is the recoveries 
team which moves in to recover loan losses. 
Overall authority for market risk is vested in the ALCO. 
The Risk Management unit is responsible for the 
development of detailed risk management policies 
(subject to review and approval by ALCO) and for the 
day-to-day review of their implementation.
Exposure to other market risks – Non-trading 
portfolios.
The principal risk to which non-trading portfolios are 
exposed is the risk of loss from fluctuations in the 
future cash flows or fair values of financial instruments 
because of a change in market interest rates. Interest 
rate risk is managed principally through monitoring 
interest rate gaps and by having pre-approved limits 
for repricing bands. ALCO is the monitoring body for 
compliance with these limits and is assisted by Central 
Treasury in its day-to-day monitoring activities.
In the last three years, the Bank has taken steps to 
provide the necessary safeguards to ensure that 
market risk is kept within reasonable limits.
5.3 Operational risk
Operational risk is the risk of direct or indirect loss 
arising from a wide variety of causes associated with 
the Bank’s processes, personnel, technology and 
infrastructure and from external factors other than 
credit, market and liquidity risk such as those arising 
from legal and regulatory requirements and generally 
accepted standards of corporate behavior.
The Bank’s objective is to manage operational risk so 
as to balance the avoidance of financial losses and 
damage to the Bank’s reputation with overall cost 
effectiveness and to avoid control procedures that 
restrict initiative and creativity.
The primary responsibility for the development and 
implementation of controls to address operational 
risk is assigned to senior management within each 
business unit.  The responsibility is supported by 
the development of overall bank’s standard for the 
management of operational risk in the following areas:
• Requirement of appropriate segregation of 
duties, including the independent authorisation 
of transactions;
• Requirements for the reconciliation and 
monitoring of transactions;
• Compliance with regulatory and other legal 
requirements;
• Documentation of controls and procedures;
• Requirements for the periodic assessment 54         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
of operational losses faced and adequacy 
of controls and  procedures to address risks 
identified;
• Requirement for the reporting of operational 
losses and proposed remedial action;
• Development of contingency plans;
• Training and professional development;
• Ethical and business standards;
• Risk mitigation including insurance where this is 
effective.
Compliance with bank’s standards is supported by a 
program of periodic reviews undertaken by internal 
audit, risk and compliance departments.  The results 
of these reviews are discussed with the management 
of the business unit to which they relate, with 
summaries submitted to executive committee, audit 
and compliance committee, governance and risk 
committee and the board.
Over the past three years, operational risks have 
reduced due to constant training, automation of many 
processes and enhancement in controls.
5.4 Credit risk
Credit risk is the risk that the Bank will incur a loss 
because its customers or counterparties fail to 
discharge their contractual obligations. The Bank 
manages and controls credit risk by setting limits on 
the amount of risk it is willing to accept for individual 
counterparties and for industry concentrations, and 
by monitoring exposures in relation to such limits. 
Credit risk is monitored by the Credit Risk Department 
of the Bank. It is their responsibility to review and 
manage credit risk, for all types of counterparties. 
Credit risk consists of line credit risk managers who 
are responsible for their business lines and manage 
specific portfolios and experts who support both the 
line credit risk manager, as well as the business 
with tools like credit risk systems, policies, models 
and reporting. The Bank has established a credit 
quality review process to provide early identification 
of possible changes in the creditworthiness of 
counterparties, including regular collateral revisions. 
Counterparty limits are established by the use of a 
credit risk classification models, which assigns each 
counterparty a risk rating. Risk ratings are subject 
to regular revision. The credit quality review process 
aims to allow the Bank to assess the potential loss as 
a result of the risks to which it is exposed and take 
corrective actions.
For risk management reporting purposes, the Bank 
considers and consolidates all elements of credit risk 
exposure.
5.4.1 Management of credit risk
The Board of Directors has delegated responsibility for 
the management of credit risk to its Credit-Committee 
and Sub-Board Risk Management Committee. A 
separate Credit department, reporting to the Executive 
Committee, is responsible for oversight of the Bank’s 
credit risk, including:
• Formulating credit policies in consultation with 
business units, covering collateral requirements, credit assessment, risk grading and reporting, 
documentary and legal procedures, and 
compliance with regulatory and statutory 
requirements.
• Establishing the authorisation structure for 
the approval and renewal of credit facilities. 
Authorisation limits are allocated to business 
units.  Larger facilities require approval by the 
Executive Committee members and the Board 
(Sub Committee) on risk management.
• Reviewing and assessing credit risk. The Credit 
department assesses all credit exposures in 
excess of designated limits, prior to facilities 
being committed to customers by the business 
unit concerned. Renewals and reviews of facilities 
are subject to the same review process.  Limiting 
concentrations of exposure to counterparties, 
geographies and industries (for loans and 
advances), and by issuer, credit rating band, 
market liquidity and country (for investment 
securities).
• Developing and maintaining the Bank’s risk 
grading in order to categories exposures 
according to the degree of risk of financial 
loss faced and to focus management on the 
attendant risks.  The risk grading system is used 
in determining where impairment provisions may 
be required against specific credit exposures.  
The current risk grading framework consists of 
5 grades reflecting varying degrees of risk of 
default and the availability of collateral or other 
credit risk mitigation.  The responsibility for setting 
risk grades lies with the Board of Directors. Risk 
grades are subject to regular reviews by the Risk 
Management Department.
• Reviewing compliance of business units with 
agreed exposure limits, including those for 
selected industries, country risk and product 
types.  Regular reports are provided by the credit 
department on the credit quality of portfolios and 
appropriate corrective action is taken.
• Providing advice, guidance and specialist skills to 
business units to promote best practice throughout 
the Bank in the management of credit risk.
5.4.2. Credit–related commitments risks
The Bank makes available to its customers 
guarantees that may require that the Bank 
makes payments on their behalf and enters into 
commitments to extend credit lines to secure their 
liquidity needs. Letters of credit and guarantees 
(including standby letters of credit) commit the 
Bank to make payments on behalf of customers 
in the event of a specific act, generally related to 
the import or export of goods. Such commitments 
expose the Bank to similar risks to loans and are 
mitigated by the same control processes and 
policies management of credit risk.2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            55         5.4.3.  Definition of default and cure
The Bank considers a financial instrument 
defaulted and therefore Stage 3 (credit-impaired) 
for ECL calculations in all cases when the borrower 
becomes 90 days past due on its contractual 
payments. The Bank considers treasury and 
interbank balances defaulted and takes immediate 
action when the required intraday payments are 
not settled by the close of business as outlined in 
the individual agreements. As a part of a qualitative 
assessment of whether a customer is in default, 
the Bank also considers a variety of instances 
that may indicate unlikeliness to pay. When such 
events occur, the Bank carefully considers whether 
the event should result in treating the customer as 
defaulted and therefore assessed as Stage 3 for 
ECL calculations or whether Stage 2 is appropriate. 
Such events include:
• Internal rating of the borrower indicating default 
or near-default
• The borrower requesting emergency funding 
from the Bank
• The borrower is deceased
• A material decrease in the underlying collateral 
value where the recovery of the loan is 
expected from the sale of the collateral
• A material decrease in the borrower’s turnover 
or the loss of a major customer
• A covenant breach not waived by the Bank
• The debtor facing financial difficulties
It is the Bank’s policy to consider a financial 
instrument as ‘cured’ and therefore re-classified 
out of Stage 3 when none of the default criteria 
have been present for at least five consecutive 
months. The decision whether to classify an asset 
as Stage 2 or Stage 1 once cured depends on the 
updated credit grade, at the time of the cure, and 
whether this indicates there has been a significant 
increase/decrease in credit risk compared to initial 
recognition.
5.4.4.  The Bank’s internal rating and PD estimation  
           process
The Bank’s Credit Risk Department operates its 
internal rating models. The Bank runs separate 
models for its key portfolios in which its customers 
are rate from 1 to 6 using internal grades. The 
models incorporate both qualitative and quantitative 
information and, in addition to information specific 
to the borrower, utilise supplemental external 
information that could affect the borrower’s ability to 
pay. Where practical, they also build on information 
from Credit Bureaus. These information sources 
are first used to determine the PDs within the 
Bank’s framework. The internal credit grades are 
assigned based on these Based II grades. PDs 
are then adjusted for IFRS 9 ECL calculations 
to incorporate forward looking information and 
the IFRS 9 Stage classification of the exposure. 
This is repeated for each economic scenario as 
appropriate.Each exposure is allocated to a credit risk 
grade on initial recognition based on available 
information about the borrower. Exposures are 
subject to ongoing monitoring, which may result in 
an exposure being moved to a different credit risk 
grade. The monitoring typically involves use of the 
following data
Corporate Exposures: 
• Information obtained during periodic review 
of customer files – e.g. audited financial 
statements, management accounts, budgets 
and projections. Examples of areas of 
particular focus are: gross profit margins, 
financial leverage ratios, debt service 
coverage, compliance with covenants, quality 
of management, senior management changes.
5.4.5.  The Bank’s internal rating and PD estimation 
           process
Retail Exposures
• Internally collected data on customer behavior 
• Affordability metrics
• External data from credit reference agencies.
• All Exposures
• Payment record – this includes overdue status 
as well as a range of variables about payment 
ratios
• Utilization of the granted limit
• Requests for and granting of restructuring
• Existing and forecast changes in business, 
financial and economic conditions
Generating the term structure of PD
• Credit risk grades are a primary input into the 
determination of the term structure of PD for 
exposures. The Bank collects performance 
and default information about its credit risk 
exposures analyzed by type of product and 
borrower as well as by credit risk grading. For 
some portfolios, information purchased from 
external credit reference agencies is also used. 
The Bank employs statistical models to analyse 
the data collected and generate estimates of 
the remaining lifetime PD of exposures and 
how these are expected to change as a result 
of the passage of time.
Bank’s internal rating
Grade 1-3: low fair risk
Advances in this category are those for which the 
borrower is up to date (i.e. current) with repayments 
of both principal and interest. Indications that 
an overdraft is still current would include regular 
activity on the account with no sign that a hardcore 
of debt is building up.
Grade 4-5
Advances in this category are currently protected 
by adequate security, both as to principal and 56         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
interest, but they are potentially weak and 
constitute an undue credit risk, although not to the 
point of justifying the classification of substandard.  
This category would include unusual advances 
due to the nature of the advance, customer or 
project, advances where there is a lack of financial 
information or any other advance where there is 
more than a normal degree of risk
Grade 6
Substandard advances display well-defined credit 
weaknesses that jeopardise the liquidation of 
the debt. Substandard advances include loans 
to borrowers whose cash flow is not sufficient to 
meet currently maturing debt, loans to borrowers 
which are significantly undercapitalised, and loans 
to borrowers lacking sufficient working capital 
to meet their operating needs. Substandard 
advances are not protected by the current sound 
worth and paying capacity of the customer.
Grade 7
Doubtful advances exhibit all the weaknesses 
inherent in advances classified as substandard 
with the added characteristics that the advances 
are not well-secured and the weaknesses make 
collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of 
currently existing facts, conditions and values, 
highly questionable and improbable. The 
possibility of loss is extremely high, but because of 
certain important and reasonably specific pending 
factors, which may work to the advantage and 
strengthening of the advance, its classification as 
in estimated loss is deferred until its more exact 
status may be determined.
Non-performing loans and receivables which are 
at least 180 days overdue, but less than 360 days 
overdue are also classified as doubtful.
Grade 8
Advances classified as a loss are considered 
uncollectable and of such little value that their 
continuation as recoverable advances is not 
warranted. This classification does not mean that 
the advance has absolutely no recovery value, but 
rather it is not practical or desirable to defer writing 
off this basically worthless advance even though 
partial recovery may be affected in the future.  
Advances classified as a loss include bankrupt 
companies and loans to insolvent firms with 
negative working capital and cash flow.  Banks 
should not retain advances on the books while 
attempting long-term recoveries. Losses should 
be taken in the period in which they surface as 
uncollectable.
Non-performing loans and receivables which are 
360 days or more overdue are also classified as 
a loss
5.4.6    Exposure at default
The exposure at default (EAD) represents the 
gross carrying amount of the financial instruments 
subject to the impairment calculation, addressing 
both the client’s ability to increase its exposure 
while approaching default and potential early repayments too. To calculate the EAD for a Stage 
1 loan, the Bank assesses the possible default 
events within 12 months for the calculation of 
the 12mECL. However, if a Stage 1 loan that is 
expected to default in the 12 months from the 
balance sheet date and is also expected to cure 
and subsequently default again, then all linked 
default events are considered. For Stage 2, Stage 
3 and POCI financial assets, the exposure at 
default is considered for events over the lifetime 
of the instruments.
The Bank determines EADs by modelling the range 
of possible exposure outcomes at various points 
in time, corresponding the multiple scenarios. The 
IFRS 9 PDs are then assigned to each economic 
scenario based on the outcome of Bank’s models.
5.4.7    Loss given default
For corporate and investment banking financial 
instruments, LGD values are assessed at least 
every year by account managers and reviewed 
and approved by the Bank’s Credit Risk 
Department. The credit risk assessment is based 
on a standardised LGD assessment framework 
that results in a certain LGD rate. These LGD 
rates consider the expected EAD in comparison to 
the amount expected to be recovered or realised 
from any collateral held. The Bank segments its 
retail lending products into smaller homogeneous 
portfolios, based on key characteristic that are 
relevant to the estimation of future cash flows. 
The applied data is based on historically collected 
loss data and involves a wider set of transaction 
characteristics (e.g., product type, wider 
range of collateral types) as well as borrower 
characteristics. Further recent data and forward-
looking economic scenarios are used in order to 
determine the IFRS 9 LGD rate for each group of 
financial instruments. When assessing forward-
looking information, the expectation is based on 
multiple scenarios. Examples of key inputs involve 
changes in, collateral values including property 
pricesfor mortgages, commodity prices, payment 
status or other factors that are indicative of losses 
in the Bank. 
The Bank estimates regulatory and IFRS 9 LGDs 
on a different basis. Under IFRS 9, LGD rates are 
estimated for the Stage 1, Stage 2 and Stage 3 of 
each asset class. 
The inputs for these LGD rates are estimated and, 
where possible, calibrated through back testing 
against recent recoveries. These are repeated for 
each economic scenario as appropriate.
5.4.8    Significant increase in credit risk
The Bank continuously monitors all assets 
subject to ECLs. In order to determine whether an 
instrument or a portfolio of instruments is subject 
to 12mECL or LTECL, the Bank assesses whether 
there has been a significant increase in credit risk 
since initial recognition. The Bank considers an 
exposure to have significantly increased in credit 2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            57         risk when the IFRS 9 lifetime PD has doubled 
since initial recognition and has increased by more 
than 20 bps a year.
The Bank also applies a secondary qualitative 
method for triggering a significant increase 
in credit risk for an asset, such as moving a 
customer/facility to the watch list, or the account 
becoming forborne. In certain cases, the Bank 
may also consider that events explained earlier 
are a significant increase in credit risk as opposed 
to a default. Regardless of the change in credit 
grades, if contractual payments are more than 30 
days past due, the credit risk is deemed to have 
increased significantly since initial recognition.
When estimating ECLs on a collective basis for a 
group of similar assets, the Bank applies the same 
principles for assessing whether there has been 
a significant increase in credit risk since initial 
recognition.As explained earlier dependent on the 
factors below, the Bank calculates ECLs either on 
a collective or an individual basis.
Asset classes where the Bank calculates ECL on 
an individual basis include:
• All Stage 3 assets, regardless of the class of 
financial assets
• The Corporate lending portfolio
• The large and unique exposures of the Small 
business lending portfolio
• The treasury, trading and interbank 
relationships (such as Due from Banks, Cash 
collateral on securities borrowed and reverse 
repurchase agreements and debt instruments 
at amortised cost/FVOCI.
Asset classes where the Bank calculates ECL on 
a collective basis include the smaller and more 
generic balances of the Bank’s retail business 
lending
Incorporation of forward-looking information
The Bank incorporates forward-looking information 
into both the assessment of whether the credit risk 
of an instrument has increased significantly since 
its initial recognition and the measurement of ECL. 
The Bank formulates three economic scenarios:
• A base case, which is the median scenario 
assigned a 50% (2019: 70%) probability of 
occurring, and 
• two less likely scenarios; 
• one upside 15% (2019: 15%) and 
• one downside 35% (2019:15%) probability of 
occurring.
The base case is aligned with information used 
by the Bank for other purposes such as strategic 
planning and budgeting. External information 
considered includes economic data and forecasts 
published by governmental bodies and monetary 
authorities. Periodically, the Bank carries out 
stress testing of more extreme shocks to calibrate its determination of the upside and downside 
representative scenarios.  The Bank has identified 
and documented key drivers of credit risk and credit 
losses for each portfolio of financial instruments 
and, using an analysis of historical data, has 
estimated relationships between macro-economic 
variables and credit risk and credit losses. The 
key drivers for credit risk are: GDP growth, and 
interest rates.
Analysis of inputs to the ECL model under multiple economic 
scenarios per is detailed below
As at 31 December 2020
Key Drivers Scenario 2021
GDPBase case 6.30%
Upside 6.50%
Downside 5.50%
InflationBase case 9.00%
upside 8.90%
downside 10.80%
Interest ratesBase case 19.00%
upside 16.50%
downside 20.60%
Non Performing 
loan ratioBase case 21.59%
upside 20.25%
downside 22.80%
As at 31 December 2019
Key drivers Scenario 2020
GDP Base case 6.70%
Upside 7.30%
Downside 5.40%
Inflation Base case 7.90%
upside 7.70%
downside 8.30%
Interest rates Base case 19.00%
upside 17.00%
downside 19.80%
Non Performing 
loan ratioBase case 20.00%
upside 19.60%
downside 21.62%
5.4.8   Significant increase in credit risk
COVID-19 IMPACT 
The impact of Covid-19 on the bank’s credit 
exposures was minimal. The bank is least exposed 
to sectors that were mostly affected by the 
pandemic. The bank reviewed the performances 
of Loans and Advances before and during the 
Covid-19 pandemic period which focused on 
monthly average default rate by comparing 
repayment obligations that were not settled within 
the month they were due for repayment against the 
total repayment obligations due for that period. It 
was observed that, contrary to analyst projections 58         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
of increased average default rate due to the 
pandemic, the rate of default actually improved on 
a monthly basis. A forward-looking analysis of the 
trend suggested that default rates were to improve. 
This observation affirms the fact that majority 
of the Bank’s borrowing customers operated in 
sectors which were not adversely affected by the 
covid-19 pandemic. Given a likely positive outlook 
and strict risk management practice e.g. not 
disbursing funds to customers operating in sectors 
adversely affected by the covid-19 pandemic even 
though their facilities may have been approved, 
among others, the bank does not expect to record 
a significant increase in credit risk and impairment. 
The Bank is therefore likely to continue to realize 
further improvement in loan default rate. 
However based on the bank’s recognition that 
the persistence of the pandemic can have an 
adverse impact on business confidence which 
can trickle down to individual obligors in the 
economy, the bank took a conservative approach 
to determining a forward looking assessment 
of the impact of COVID by assigning the higher 
weighting to the downside (worse case)  scenario 
in its PD determination in 2020, thereby leading 
to increased Probability of defaults (PDs) in 
its ECL computation for the period. Apart from 
this adjustment to PDs, no further post model 
adjustments or overlays.
5.4.9   Measurement of ECL
The key inputs into the measurement of ECL are 
the term structure of the following variables:
• probability of default (PD);
• loss given default (LGD); and
• exposure at default (EAD)
• GDP growth and interest rates.
12 months ECL for exposures in Stage 1 is 
calculated by multiplying the 12-month PD by LGD 
and EAD. Lifetime ECL is calculated by multiplying 
the lifetime PD by LGD and EAD. The methodology 
of estimating PDs, LGD and EAD has been 
discussed above.
5.4.10 Settlement Risk
• Settlement Risk is the risk that counterparty 
will fail to deliver cash (or securities) due to 
be delivered at a particular moment in time, 
following the release of the corresponding 
cash (or Securities) by the bank in settlement 
of a transaction. Further details in respect of this category of credit risk are contained in the 
Wholesale Credit Risk below.
• Intraday Exposure
Intraday Exposure is a revolving exposure, 
which arises whenever funds are irrevocably 
paid away by the Bank in the expectation of 
the receipt of cleared covering funds (or the 
deposit of collateral) at some time during 
the same business day. The Bank may be 
acting either in its own right, or on behalf of a 
customer, when it pays away the funds. The 
products, which give rise to Intraday Exposure, 
include forex settlements. 
• The intraday credit, which the Bank allows 
its customers, is always in expectation of 
incoming funds, and as such the exposure is 
real in that it manifests itself as a borrowing/
overdraft when things go wrong. 
• The true extent of Intraday Exposure to a 
customer will be calculated as a single running 
balance taken at any one point in the day. This 
running balance will be adjusted by each single 
transfer of funds into and out of any account in 
that customer’s name, where such transfers 
represent cleared funds. The same principles 
apply when accounts are grouped (and where 
set-off is available) to produce an aggregate 
net exposure.
5.4.11 Credit Risk Transfers
• This risk arises when certain eligible collateral 
types (including risk participations, standby 
letters of credit and bank guarantees) are held 
to mitigate obligor risk. Whilst these instruments 
can significantly mitigate obligor credit risk, an 
alternative risk arises, being reimbursement 
risk - the risk that the participant/guarantor 
fails to honour their commitment in the event 
that the underlying obligor defaults (this is also 
referred to as double default risk).
5.4.12  Analysis of credit quality
The tables below set out information about the 
credit quality of financial assets and the allowance 
for impairment/loss held by the Bank against those 
assets.
Maximum exposure to credit risk2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            59         Bank 
BalancesLoans & 
advances to 
customerInvestment 
securitiesDue from 
BanksCommitments 
& guarantee
2020 2019 2020 2019 2020 2019 2020 2019 2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross 
amount603,607 807,653 2,318,364 1,916,775 2,222,139 1,522,828 312,220 274,644 3,829,211 404,046
Allowance for 
impairment- - (406,376) (448,122) - - (3,122) (2,747) (24,811) (11,723)
603,607 807,653 1,911,988 1,468,653 2,222,139 1,522,828 309,098 271,897 3,804,400 392,323
5.4.13 Loans with renegotiated terms
Loans with renegotiated terms
Gross carrying amount (189,080) (87,668)  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Allowance for impairment (5) (7,147)  -  -  -  -  -  - 
Net carrying amount (189,075) (80,521)  -  -  -  -  -  - 
The contractual terms of a loan may be modified 
for a number of reasons, including changing 
market conditions, customer retention and 
other factors not related to a current or potential 
credit deterioration of the customer.  An existing 
loan may be derecognised and the renegotiated 
loan recognised as a new loan at fair value in 
accordance with the accounting policy set out in 
Notes 5.4.
The Bank renegotiates loans to customers 
in financial difficulties to maximise collection 
opportunities and minimise the risk of default.  
Under the Bank’s forbearance policy, loan 
forbearance is granted on a selective basis if the 
debtor is currently in default on its debt or if there 
is a high risk of default, there is evidence that the 
debtor made all reasonable efforts to pay under 
the original contractual terms and the debtor is 
expected to be able to meet the revised terms. 
The revised terms usually include extending the 
maturity, changing the timing of interest payments 
and amending the terms of loan covenants. Both 
retail and corporate loans are subject to the 
forbearance policy. 
For the purposes of disclosures in these financial 
statements, ‘loans with renegotiated terms’ are 
defined as loans that have been restructured 
due to a deterioration in the borrower’s financial 
position, for which the Bank has made concessions 
by agreeing to terms and conditions that are more 
favourable for the borrower than the Bank had 
provided initially and that it would not otherwise 
consider.  A loan continues to be presented as 
part of loans with renegotiated terms until maturity, 
earlier repayment or until it is written off.
Irrespective of whether loans with renegotiated 
terms have been derecognised or not, they remain disclosed as impaired until there is sufficient 
evidence to demonstrate a significant reduction 
in the risk of non-payment of future cash flows 
and there are no other indicators of impairment.
When the contractual cash flows of a financial 
asset are renegotiated or otherwise modified, and 
the renegotiation or modification does not result 
in the derecognition of that financial asset, a bank 
shall recalculate the gross carrying amount of the 
financial asset and shall recognise a modification 
gain or loss in profit or loss. The gross carrying 
amount of the financial asset shall be recalculated 
as the present value of the renegotiated or modified 
contractual cash flows that are discounted at the 
financial asset’s original effective interest rate (or 
credit adjusted effective interest rate for purchased 
or originated credit-impaired financial assets).
Any costs or fees incurred adjust the carrying 
amount of the modified financial asset and 
areamortised over the remaining term of the 
modified financial asset
Loans and advances to customers
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 
Continuing to be impaired after 
restructuring (included in non-
performing loans)13,928 36,345
Expected credit loss 5 (2,021)
13,933 34,324
Non-impaired after restructuring 
– would otherwise have been 
impaired3,592 51,32360         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
5.4.14 Collateral held and other credit enhancements,  
           and their financial effect
The Bank holds collateral and other credit 
enhancements against most of its credit 
exposures. The Bank holds collateral against loans 
and advances to customers in the form of cash, 
mortgage interests over property, other registered 
securities over assets, and guarantees. Estimates 
of fair value are based on the value of collateral 
assessed at the time of borrowing and generally 
are not updated except when a loan is individually 
assessed as impaired. Collateral generally is not 
held over Interbank placements, except when 
securities are held as part of reverse repurchase 
and securities borrowing activity.  Collateral usually 
is not held against investment securities, and no 
such collateral was held at 31 December 2020. 
An estimate of the fair value of collateral and other 
security enhancements held against loans and 
advances to customers is shown below:
Loans and advances to customers
2020 2019
Against individually impaired GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Property 690,922 1,075,756
Others 20 110
Against neither past due 
nor impaired
Property 782,820 674,913
Others 113,862 85,692
Total 1,587,624 1,836,471
i.          Loans and advances to customers
The general creditworthiness of a customer tends 
to be the most relevant indicator of credit quality 
of a loan extended to it (see Note 5(i).  However, 
collateral provides additional security and the 
Bank generally requests that borrowers provide it.  
The Bank may take collateral in the form of a first 
charge over real estate, floating charges over all 
assets and other liens and guarantees.  The Bank 
does not routinely update the valuation of collateral 
held against all loans to customers because of 
the Bank’s focus on customers’ creditworthiness.  
Valuation of collateral is updated when the credit risk of a loan deteriorates significantly and the loan 
is monitored more closely. For impaired loans, the 
Bank obtains appraisals of collateral because the 
current value of the collateral is an input to the 
impairment measurement.
ii.     Other types of collateral and credit    
 enhancements
In addition to the collateral obtained for loans, 
the Bank also holds other types of collateral and 
credit enhancements such as second charges 
and floating charges for which specific values are 
not generally available.
iii.     Assets obtained by taking possession of   
 collateral
Repossessed items are not recognized in the 
bank’s books.  Proceeds from their sale are used 
to reduce related outstanding indebtedness.  The 
Bank has in its possession assets resulting from 
taking possession of collateral held as security 
against loans and advances at the reporting date 
(2019: nil). The carrying amount of the property 
are based on court judgments and valuation by the 
court.
Loans and 
advances to 
customers 
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Against 
individually 
impaired property400 7,542
iv.     Offsetting financial assets and financial 
 liabilities
The Bank did not hold any financial assets and 
financial liabilities that are off-set in the statement 
of financial position at the reporting date.
The Bank monitors concentrations of credit risk 
by sector. An analysis of concentrations of credit 
risk from loans and advances, and investment 
securities is shown below.2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            61         Loans and Advances to customers
2020 2019
Gross amount GH¢’000 % GH¢’000 %
Concentration by industry:
 Agriculture 516,646 22.3 519,870 27.1
 Manufacturing 34,135 1.5 48,032 2.5
 Commerce & Finance 573,380 24.7 468,992 24.5
 Transport & communications 153,636 6.6 55,359 2.9
 Mining and quarrying - 0.0 219,478 11.5
 Building & construction 186,302 8.0 602,325 31.4
 Services 802,442 34.6
 Electricity, GAS and water 51,823 2.2 2,719 0.14
2,318,364 100 1,916,775 100
Concentration by product
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
a)      Loans and advances to individual customers:
Overdraft 65,197 100,893
Term loans 500,733 318,165
565,930 419,058
b)      Loans to corporate entities:
Overdrafts 447,091 317,552
Terms loans 1,305,343 1,180,165
1,752,434 1,497,717
Gross loans and advances (a+b) 2,318,364 1,916,775
5.4.15  Concentrations of credit risk continued
Investment securities 
 These are investments in Government Treasury Bills, Notes and Bonds.
5.4.16   Regulatory Provisions
An account is considered to be in default when payment is not received on due date.  Accounts that are overdue 
by more than 90 days are considered delinquent.  These accounts are closely monitored and subjected to a 
collection process.  The process used for provisions is based on Bank of Ghana guidelines which recognize 
cash as a credit mitigate.  Individual provisions are made for outstanding amounts depending on the number 
of days past due with full provisions made after 360 days.  In certain situations, such as bankruptcy, fraud 
and death, the loss recognition process is accelerated.  Loans and advances less than 90 days past due are 
generally not considered delinquent unless other information is available to indicate otherwise.
The Bank of Ghana Guideline is as set out below:
Grade Description Number of days Provisions (%)
Current Less than 30 days 1
Other Loans Exceptionally Mentioned (OLEM) 30 to less than 90 days 10
Substandard 90 to less than 180 days 25
Doubtful 180 to less than 360 days 50
Loss 360 days and above 10062         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
5.5    Liquidity risk
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Bank is unable to meet its payment obligations associated with its financial 
liabilities when they fall due and be able to replace funds when they are withdrawn.  The consequence may be the 
failure to meet obligations to repay depositors and fulfil commitments to lend.
Management of liquidity risk
The Bank’s approach to managing liquidity is to ensure, as far as possible, that it will always have sufficient 
liquidity to meet its liabilities when due, under both normal and stressed conditions, without incurring unacceptable 
losses or risking damage to the Bank’s reputation.
The treasury department maintains a portfolio of short-term liquid assets, largely made up of short-term liquid 
investment securities, loans and advances to banks and other inter-bank facilities, to ensure that sufficient liquidity 
is maintained within the Bank as a whole.
Exposure to liquidity risk
The key measure used by the Bank for managing liquidity risk is the ratio of net liquid assets to deposits from 
customers.  For this purpose, net liquid assets are considered as including cash and cash equivalents and 
investment grade debt securities for which there is an active and liquid market less any deposits from banks, debt 
securities issued, other borrowings and commitments maturing within the next month.
For the definition of liquidity risk and information on how liquidity risk is managed by the Bank, 
Details of the reported Bank’s ratio of net liquid assets to deposits from customers at the reporting date and during 
the reporting period were as follows:
2020 2019
% %
At 31 December 17.76 44.98
Maximum for the period 24.98 44.98
Minimum for the period                                                                                  12.39 23.06
Average for the period 17.14 32.75
The table below presents the cash flows payable under non-derivative financial liabilities for managing liquidity 
risk by remaining contractual maturities at the date of the statement of financial position.  The amounts disclosed 
in the table are the contractual undiscounted cash flows however, the Bank manages the liquidity risk based on a 
different basis not resulting in a significantly different analysis.
2020 Carrying 
AmountGross 
nominalUp to 1 
month1-3 months 3 to 6 
months6 mths -
1 years1 to 5 years Over 5 
years
outflow
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Financial liabilities 
by type
Non-derivative liabilities
Deposits from customer 4,281,037 4,291,292 959,079 1,405,200 312,306 632,810 981,897 -   
Borrowed funds 313,173 377,621 54,511 42,930 1,070 - 16,252 262,859
Other liabilities 62,847 63,994 31,997 - 21,909 - - 10,088
Lease Liability 181,824 305,889 - 13,024 26,046 166,619 100,200 305,889
Total financial 
liabilities4,838,881 5,038,796 1,045,587 1,461,154 361,331 799,429 1,098,349 578,8362020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            63         2019 Carrying 
AmountGross 
nominalUp to 1 
month1-3months 3 to 6 
months6mnths -
1 years1 to 5 
yearsOver 5 
years
inflow/
outflow
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Financial liabilities by type
Non-derivative liabilities
Deposits from customer 3,392,209 3,406,685 651,140 1,238,878 297,176 465,269 622,065 132,157
Borrowed funds 277,618 343,427 38,604 41,187 6,454 2,767 14,548 239,867
Other liabilities 38,809 67,880 5,907 5,356 8,976 18,570 18,983 10,088
Lease liability 34,205 42,421 - 34,174 8,247 - 42,421 34,174
Total financial liabilities 3,742,841 3,860,413 695,651 1,319,595 320,853 486,606 698,017 416,286
5.6    Market risk
For the definition of market risk and information on the metrics (and their limitations) used by the Bank to manage  
the market risks of non-trading portfolios.
5.6.1 Interest rate risk and foreign currency risk
The Bank uses the Reuters system to monitor live interest and exchange rates to facilitate trading by the treasury   
department. This helps the Bank to know what is happening at any moment in time on the markets and where 
opportunities are present to make gains from higher interest rates. Interest rate risk is managed principally through 
monitoring interest rate gaps and by having pre-approved limits for reprising bands. The ALCO is the monitoring 
body for compliance with these limits and is assisted by Risk Management in its day-to-day monitoring activities.  
A summary of the Bank’s interest rate gap position on non-trading portfolios is as follows :
As at 31 December, 2020 Up to 1 
month1-3 months 3 months - 
less than 6 
months6 months - 
less than 1 
year1-5 years Over 5 
yearsTotal
Financial assets
Cash and cash equivalent 755,756 - - - -   -   755,756
Due from other banks - - - - 309,098 - 309,098
Investment in Government securities 359,992 305,280 1,012,224 91,102 294,591 158,950 2,222,139
Loans and advances to customers (net) 384,585 166,223 709,702 214,503 22,871 413,701 1,911,585
Total financial assets 1,500,333 471,503 1,721,926 305,605 626,560 572,651 5,198,578
Financial liabilities
Customer deposits 958,471 1,401,948 306,518 632,351 803,370 178,527 4,281,184
Borrowed funds 54,511 42,930 1,070 - 13,311 201,353 313,173
Lease Liability - - 13,024 26,046 166,619 100,200 305,889
Total financial liabilities 1,012,982 1,444,878 320,612 658,397 983,300 480,080 4,900,249
Interest rate sensitivity gap 487,352 (973,374) 1,401,314 (352,793) (356,740) 92,571 298,329
As at 31 December, 2019 Up to 1 
month1-3 
months3 months 
less than 6 
months6 months 
less than 1 
year1-5 years Over 5 
yearsTotal
Financial assets
Cash and cash equivalent 972,086 - - - - - 972,086
Due from other banks - - - - 271,895 - 271,895
Investment in Government securities 462,156 517,267 282,534 50,702 160,169 50,000 1,522,828
Loans and advances to customers (net) 594,027 50,800 42,355 261,791 395,673 124,007 1,468,653
Total financial assets 2,028,269 568,067 324,889 312,493 827,737 174,007 4,235,462
Financial liabilities
Customer deposits 651,140 1,238,878 297,176 465,269 622,064 117,682 3,392,209
Borrowed funds 38,604 41,187 6,454 2,767 14,549 174,057 277,618
Lease Liability 34,174 8,247 42,421
Total financial liabilities 689,744 1,280,065 303,630 502,210  644,860  291,739  3,712,248  
Interest rate sensitivity gap 1,338,525 (711,998) 21,259 (189,717) 182,877 (117,732)  (523,214)  64         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
Sensitivity analysis - Increase/decrease of 10% in net interest margin The interest rate risks sensitivity analysis is 
based on the following assumptions: 
Changes in the market interest rates affect the interest income or expenses of variable financial instruments; 
Changes in the market interest rates only affect interest income or expenses in relation to financial instruments 
with fixed interest rates if these are recognised at their fair values; The interest rate changes will have an effect 
on interest sensitive assets and liabilities and hence simulation modelling is applied to financial instruments which 
are quoted at variable interest rates; and The projections make other assumptions including that all positions run 
to maturity. 
The table below sets out the impact on current profit after taxation and equity of an incremental 10% parallel fall 
or rise on all yield curves at the beginning of the financial years beginning on 01 January 2020 and 01 January 
2019 respectively.
2020 Scenario 1 Scenario 2
Base Effect of 10% increase in variable 
interest rateEffect of 10% decrease in variable interest 
rate
Profit after tax 65,403 81,883 48,924
Equity 850,623 867,102 834,143
2019 Scenario 1 Scenario 2
Base Effect of 10% increase in variable interest 
rateEffect of 10% decrease in variable interest 
rate
Profit after tax 14,823 29,938 (292)
Equity 793,384 808,499 778,269
Assuming no management actions an increase in interest rates would increase the Bank’s profit after tax for the 
year by GH¢ 16,479 (2019: increase after tax by GH¢  15,115) and increase equity by GH¢ 16,479 (2019: GH¢  
15,115), while a fall would decrease  profit after tax and  equity by the same amounts.
5.6.2 Foreign exchange risk
The Bank takes on exposure to the effects of fluctuations in the prevailing foreign currency exchange rates on its 
financial position and cash flows.  The Board sets limits on the level of exposure by currency and in aggregate.
The table below summarises the Bank’s exposure to foreign currency exchange rate risk at 31 December 2020.  
The amounts stated in the table below are the Ghana Cedi equivalent of the foreign currencies.
As at 31 December 2020 US$     GBP    EUR Other Total
Assets GH¢’000     GH¢’000    GH¢’000 GH¢’000     GH¢’000
Cash and cash equivalent 107,355 14,847 21,856 2 144,060
Loans and advances to 
customers (net)232,527 1 216,301 - 448,828
Investment Securities 29,000 - 165 - 29,165
Other assets 19,320 - - - 19,320
Total financial assets 388,202 14,848 238,322 2 641,373
Liabilities
Deposits from customers 310,201 14,520 36,403 1 361,125
Borrowings 41,390 - 202,354 - 243,744
Other liabilities 31,498 26 87 - 31,611
Total financial liabilities 383,089 14,546 238,844 1 636,480
Net on balance sheet position 5,114 302 (522) 1 4,893
Contingent liabilities (2020) 82,740 -  -   - 82,7402020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            65         As at 31 December 2019 US$ GBP EUR Other Total
Assets GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cash and cash equivalent 147,154 12,674 17,362 1 177,191 
Loans and advances to customers 
(net)154,590 1 182,631 - 337,222 
Other assets 29,396 9 96 - 29,501
Total financial assets 331,140  12,684 200,089  1 543,914 
Liabilities
Deposits from customers  320,412 12,691 22,687 1 355,790 
Borrowings 11,742 - 168,656 - 180,398 
Other liabilities  9,243 22 25 - 9,290 
Total financial liabilities 341,397 12,713  191,368 1 545,478
Net on balance sheet position (10,257) (29) 8,722 1 (1,564)
The following mid inter-bank exchange rates were applied during the year:
Average rateReporting 
rate
2020 2019 2020 2019
 Cedis to
 US$ 1 5.6129 4.6010 5.7602 5.5337
 GBP 1 7.2521 6.1151 7.8742 7.3164
 EUR 1 6.4437 5.3975 7.0643 6.2114
Sensitivity Analysis on Currency Risks
The following table shows the effect of the strengthening or weakening of the GH¢ against all other currencies 
on the company’s income statement.  This sensitivity analysis indicates the potential impact on the income 
statements based upon the foreign currency exposures recorded at 31 December 2020.  (See “currency risk” 
above) and it does not represent actual or future gains or losses.
The sensitivity analysis is based on the percentage difference between the highest daily exchange rate and the 
average rate per currency recorded in the course of the respective financial year .
A strengthening/weakening of the GH¢, by the rates shown in the table, against the following currencies at 31 
December would have increased/decreased equity and income statement by the amounts shown below:
This analysis assumes that all other variables, in particular interest rates, remain constant.
2020 2019
Income 
Statement/
Equity Impact Income 
Statement/
Equity 
Impact Income 
Statement/Equity 
Impact Income 
Statement/
Equity 
Impact 
Change Strengthening Weakening Change Strengthening Weakening
In GH¢’000
US$ 5% (256) 256 5% 513 (513)
£ 5% (15) 15 5% 2 (2)
€ 5% 26 (26) 5% 436 (436)66         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
Market Risk
All trading instruments are subject to market risk, the risk that future changes in market conditions may make an 
instrument less valuable or more onerous. The instruments are recognised at fair value, and all changes in market 
directions directly affect net trading income.
Exposure to market risk is formally managed in accordance with risk limits set by senior management by buying 
or selling instruments or entering into offsetting positions.
5.6.3  Cashflow sensitivity analysis for variable rate instruments 
A change of 100 basis points in interest rates at the reporting date will have increased/decreased profit or loss 
by amounts shown below.  Each analysis assumes all other variables in particular foreign currency rates remain 
constant. 
The analysis is performed on the same basis for 2019.
Effects in Cedis 100bp 100bp
Increase Decrease
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
31-Dec-20
Average for the Period 4,154 (4,154)
Maximum for the Period 6,290 (6,290)
Minimum for the Period 2,135 (2,135)
31-Dec-19
Average for the Period 3,029 (3,029)
Maximum for the Period 4,853 (4,853)
Minimum for the Period 1,824 (1,824)
The Bank’s operations are subject to the risk of interest rate fluctuations to the extent that interest earning 
assets (including investments) and interest-bearing liabilities mature or re-price at different times or in differing 
amounts.  In the case of floating rate assets and liabilities the Bank is also exposed to basis risk, which is the 
difference between re-pricing characteristics of the various floating rate indices, such as the savings rate and six 
months LIBOR and different types of interest.  Risk management activities are aimed at optimizing net interest 
income, given market interest rate levels consistent with the Bank’ s strategies.
Asset-liability risk management activities are conducted in the context of the Bank’s sensitivity to interest rate 
changes.  The actual effect will depend on a number of factors, including the extent to which repayments are 
made earlier to later than the contracted dates and variations in interest rate sensitivity within re-pricing periods 
and amongst currencies.
The rates above show the extent to which the Bank’s interest rate exposures on assets and liabilities are 
matched.  These are allocated to time bands by reference to the earlier of the next contractual interest rate re-
pricing date and maturity.
5.7     CAPITAL MANAGEMENT
5.7.1    Regulatory Capital
The Central Bank of Ghana sets and monitors capital requirements for the Bank.
The Bank’s objectives when managing capital are:
• To safeguard the Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern so that it can continue to provide returns for 
the shareholders and benefits for the other stakeholders
• To maintain a strong capital base to support the current and future development needs of the business
• To comply with the capital requirements set by the Central Bank of Ghana
Capital adequacy and use of regulatory capital are monitored by management employing techniques based on 
the guidelines developed by the Central Bank of Ghana for supervisory purposes. The required information is 
filed with the Central Bank of Ghana on a monthly basis
The Central Bank requires each bank to:
a. Hold the minimum level of regulatory capital of GH¢400 million. 2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            67         b. Maintain a ratio of total regulatory capital; to risk weighted assets plus risk weighted off balance assets at 
above the required minimum of 10%
The Bank’s regulatory capital is analysed into two tiers:
• Tier 1 capital, which includes ordinary share capital, share premium, perpetual bonds (which are classified 
as innovative Tier 1 securities), retained earnings, translation reserve and minority interests after deductions 
for goodwill and intangible assets, and other regulatory adjustments relating to items that are included in 
equity but are treated differently for capital adequacy purposes Tier 2 capital, which includes capitalised 
revaluations reserves, latent revaluation reserves, undisclosed reserves, revaluation reserves, subordinated 
Loans and Hybrid Capital subject to a limit of 100% of Tier 1 Capital.
The Bank’s policy is to maintain a strong capital base so as to maintain investor, creditor and market confidence 
and to sustain future development of the business.  The impact of the level of capital on shareholders’ return is 
also recognised and the Bank recognises the need to maintain a balance between the higher returns that might 
be possible with greater gearing and the advantages and security afforded by a sound capital position.
5.7.2    Capital adequacy ratio
The Capital Adequacy Ratio is the quotient of the capital base of the Bank and the Bank’s risk-weighted asset 
base. In accordance with Central Bank of Ghana regulations, a minimum ratio of 10% is to be maintained.
The Bank’s regulatory capital position at 31 December, was as follows:
2020
GH¢’000 
Tier 1 Capital
Ordinary share capital 698,700
Retained earnings (252,235)
Statutory reserve 141,214
Other regulatory adjustment (203,476)
 CET1 Capital after Deductions (B) 384,203
GH¢’000 
Fair Value Reserves 52,326
Revaluation reserve 28,766
Unaudited Profit -   
Disallowed (limited to 2% of RWA) (21,371)
Tier 2 Capital 59,721 
Total Regulatory Capital (Tier 1 + Tier 2) 443,924
Credit risk
Risk weighted assets
On-balance sheet items 2,166,040
Off-balance sheet items 230,404
On & Off-Balance Sheet Trading Book RWA
1.4 Credit Risk Reserve (CRR) (153,088)
1.5 Total Credit Risk Equivalent Weighted Asset (RWA) 2,243,356
Operational Risk 734,162
Market Risk 8,465
 Total Credit Risk Equivalent Weighted Asset (RWA) 2,985,983 
Section C: Risk ratios
1. Risk-based capital ratios
1.1 Common Equity Tier 1 / RWA 12.87 
1.2 Additional Tier 1 / RWA  -   
1.3 Tier 1 / RWA 12.87 
1.4 Tier 2 / RWA  2.00 
1.5 Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) 14.87 68         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
5.7.2  Capital adequacy ratio
 2019
 GH¢’000 
Tier 1 Capital
Ordinary share capital 698,700
Retained earnings (289,349)
Statutory reserve 108,512
Other regulatory adjustment (225,977)
 CET1 Capital after Deductions (B) 291,886
 GH¢’000 
Fair Value Reserves 60,163
Revaluation reserve 28,766
Unaudited Profit                                
-   
Disallowed (limited to 2% of RWA) (48,530)
Tier 2 Capital 40,399
Total Regulatory Capital (Tier 1 + Tier 2) 332,285
Credit risk
Risk weighted assets
On-balance sheet items 1,417,500
Off-balance sheet items 96,304
On & Off-Balance Sheet Trading Book RWA
1.4 Credit Risk Reserve (CRR) 157,827
1.5 Total Credit Risk Equivalent Weighted Asset (RWA) 1,355,977
Operational Risk 644,696
Market Risk 19,277
Total Credit Risk Equivalent Weighted Asset (RWA) 2,019,950
Section C: Risk ratios
1. Risk-based capital ratios
1.1 Common Equity Tier 1 / RWA 14.45%
1.2 Additional Tier 1 / RWA 0%
1.3 Tier 1 / RWA 14.45%
1.4 Tier 2 / RWA 2%
1.5 Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) 16.45%
5.7.3  REVIEW OF CAPITAL ADEQUACY RATIO
The allocation of capital between specific operations and activities is, to a large extent, driven by optimization 
of the return achieved on the capital allocated.  The amount of capital allocated to each operation or activity is 
based primarily upon the regulatory capital, but in some cases the regulatory requirements do not reflect fully 
the varying degree of risk associated with different activities.  In such cases the capital requirements may be 
flexed to reflect differing risk profiles, subject to the overall level of capital to support a particular operation or 
activity not falling below the minimum required for regulatory purposes.  The process of allocating capital to 
specific operations and activities is undertaken independently by the Bank Credit Committee and or ALCO as 
appropriate.
Although maximization of the return on risk-adjusted capital is the principal basis used in determining how 
capital is allocated within the Bank to particular operations or activities, it is not the sole basis used for decision 
making. Account also is taken of synergies with other operations and activities, the availability of management 
and other resources, and the fit of the activity with the Bank’s longer-term strategic objectives.  The Bank’s 
policies in respect of capital management and allocation are reviewed regularly by the Board of Directors2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            69         5.7.4    Basel II
Bank of Ghana (BoG), in its bid to ensure the 
stability of the Ghanaian Banking Sector and keep 
pace with global development and growth in risk 
management practices rolled out, in October 2017, 
a Capital Requirement Directive (CRD) which 
require banks to implement Pillar 1 principles of 
Basel II. BoG requires banks to commence the 
implementation of the directive from 1 January 
2018 with an effective compliance date of 1 July 
2018.
 The Capital Requirement Directive has four main 
parts. The first part provides principles for capital 
management and the constituents of eligible 
regulatory capital. The second, third and fourth 
parts provide guidance on the role of the board in 
the management of credit, operational and market 
risk respectively. Guidelines for the computation of 
credit risk weighted asset, operational and market 
risk capital charges are also detailed in the CRD 
document.
It is expected that the implementation of Basel 
principles will have a significant impact on the 
overall risk culture of banks and will ultimately 
enhance the risk and capital management of 
banks.
 In September 2017, the Bank of Ghana announced 
a new minimum capital requirement, as part of 
a holistic financial sector reform plan to further 
develop, strengthen, and modernize the financial 
sector to support the government’s economic 
vision and transformational agenda.
5.7.5   MINIMUM CAPITAL REQUIREMENT 
In accordance with Section 28 (1) of the Banks and 
Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 
(Act 930), the Bank of Ghana (BOG) increased 
the minimum capital requirement for commercial 
banks from GH¢ 120 million to GH¢ 400 million.
The Directive required all Banks to comply with the 
new capital requirement by the end of December 
2018.  Non-compliance with the new minimum 
paid up capital requirement shall be dealt with 
in accordance with section 33 of the Banks and 
Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 2016 
(Act 930).
Banks are required to meet the new capital 
requirements using either of the following methods:
• Fresh capital injection
• Capitalisation of retained earnings; and
• A combination of fresh capital injection and 
capitalisation of retained earnings.
6.      FAIR VALUES OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
The fair values of financial assets and financial 
liabilities that are traded in active markets are 
based on quoted market prices or dealer price 
quotations.  For all other financial instruments, the 
Bank determines fair values using other valuation 
techniques.For financial instruments that trade infrequently 
and have little price transparency, fair value is 
less objective, and requires varying degrees of 
judgment depending on liquidity, concentration, 
uncertainty of market factors, pricing assumptions 
and other risks affecting the specific instrument.
a.       Valuation models
The Bank measures fair values using the following 
fair value hierarchy, which reflects the significance 
of the inputs used in making the measurements.
Level 1: inputs that are quoted market prices 
(unadjusted) in active markets for identical 
instruments.
Level 2: inputs other than quoted prices included 
within Level 1 that are observable either directly 
(i.e. as prices) or indirectly (i.e. derived from 
prices).  This category includes instruments valued 
using: quoted market prices in active markets for 
similar instruments; quoted prices for identical or 
similar instruments in markets that are considered 
less than active; or other valuation techniques in 
which all significant inputs are directly or indirectly 
observable from market data.
Level 3: inputs that are unobservable.  This 
category includes all instruments for which the 
valuation technique includes inputs not based on 
observable data and the unobservable inputs have 
a significant effect on the instrument’s valuation.  
This category includes instruments that are valued 
based on quoted prices for similar instruments 
for which significant unobservable adjustments 
or assumptions are required to reflect differences 
between the instruments.
Valuation techniques include net present value 
and discounted cash flow models, comparison 
with similar instruments for which market 
observable prices exist and other valuation 
models.  Assumptions and inputs used in valuation 
techniques include risk-free and benchmark 
interest rates, credit spreads and other premia 
used in estimating discount rates and foreign 
currency exchange rates and expected price 
volatilities and correlations.
The objective of valuation techniques is to arrive 
at a fair value measurement that reflects the price 
that would be received to sell the asset or paid 
to transfer the liability in an orderly transaction 
between market participants at the measurement 
date.
Observable prices or model inputs are usually 
available in the market for listed debt and equity 
securities, exchange-traded derivatives and simple 
over-the-counter derivatives such as interest rate 
swaps.
Availability of observable market prices and 
model inputs reduces the need for management 
judgement and estimation and also reduces the 70         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
uncertainty associated with determining fair values.  Availability of observable market prices and inputs varies 
depending on the products and markets and is prone to changes based on specific events and general conditions 
in the financial markets.
b. Financial instruments measured at fair value   –   fair value hierarchy
The following table analyses financial instruments measured at fair value at the reporting date, by the level in the 
fair value hierarchy into which the fair value measurement is categorised. The amounts are based on the values 
recognised in the statement of financial position.
2020 Total
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 fair value
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Investment Securities - - - -
Investment (Other than Securities) - 91,892 - 91,892
91,892 91,892
2019 Total
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 fair value
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Investment Securities - - - -
Investment (Other than Securities) - 102,322 - 102,322
- 102,322 - 102,322
Equity instruments  - Investment (Other than Securities)
The bank has equity in non-listed entities, the investment is initially recognized at transaction price and re-
measured (to the extent information is available) and valued on case by case basis. The fair values of equity 
instruments are determined using market proxy.
2020 Core range of inputs
GH¢’000 Low High Unit
Level 2 
Assets
GH¢’000Valuation 
TechniqueSignificant 
unobservable
inputs  
Equity 91,892 Market ProxyEV/EBITDA 
proxy
Price /Book 
proxy12.2
0.713.0
1.1Basis point
Basis point
2019 Core range of inputs
GH¢’000 Low High Unit
Level 2 
Assets
GH¢’000Valuation 
TechniqueSignificant 
unobservable
inputs  
Equity 102,322Market 
ProxyEV/EBITDA 
proxy
Price /Book 
proxy14.2
0.814.9
1.2Basis point
Basis point
c. Fair value of financial instruments not measured at fair value
 Set out below is a comparison, by class, of the carrying amounts and fair values of the Bank’s financial  
instruments that are not carried at fair value in the financial statements. This table does not include the fair 
values of non–financial assets and non–financial liabilities:2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            71         2020 Fair Value
In GH¢'000 Carrying Value Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Financial assets: 
Due from other Banks 309,098 - - 262,395 262,395 
Loans and advances to 
customers1,911,988 - 1,173,376 1,301,765 2,475,141 
2,221,086 - 1,173,376 1,564,160 2,737,536
Financial liabilities 
Borrowed funds 313,173 - 96,535 131,584 228,119
2019 Fair Value
In GH¢'000 Carrying Value Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Financial assets: 
Due from other Banks 277,618 - - 262,395 262,395 
Loans and advances to 
customers1,468,653 - 818,691 742,234 1,560,925 
1,746,271 - 818,691 1,004,629 1,823,320
Financial liabilities 
Borrowed funds 277,618 - 84,160 119,924 204,085 
Any other financial instruments not disclosed on the table above have their carrying amount approximate to the 
fair value.
Due from other Banks
The fair values of these instrument are estimated by a discounted cash flow model based on contractual cash  
flows using estimated yields incorporating the counterparties’ credit risk.
Loans and advances to customers
The fair values of loans and advances are estimated by discounted cash flow models that incorporateassumptions 
for credit risks, foreign exchange risk, probability of default and loss given default estimates. 
Borrowed funds
The fair value of borrowed funds is estimated by a discounted cash flow model using market rate for similar 
instruments trading in the market.
7.       OPERATING SEGMENTS
Operating segments
Segment information is presented in respect of the Bank’s business segments.  
The primary format, business segments, is based on the Bank’s management and internal reporting structure.
Business segments pay and receive interest to and from the Central Treasury on an arm’s length basis to reflect 
the borrowing from or placement into the pool of investments.
Segment capital expenditure is the total cost incurred during the period to acquire property and equipment and 
intangible assets other than goodwill.
The Bank does not have reliance on a single major customer. The total revenue of the Bank during the year 
was not earned from transactions with a single external customer. No single customer contributed 10 per cent 
or more of an entity’s revenues.
Business segments
The Bank has the following main business segments:
• Corporate Banking: includes loans, deposits and other transactions and balances with corporate customers 
including the Agricultural sector.
• Retail Banking: includes loans, deposits and other transactions and balances with retail customers.72         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
• Central Treasury: undertakes the Bank’s funding and centralised risk management activities through 
borrowings, issues of debt securities for risk management purposes and investing in liquid assets such as 
short-term placements and corporate and government debt securities.
The Bank also has a central Shared Services operation that provides support services to the above-mentioned 
segments, manages the Bank’s premises and certain corporate costs.  Cost-sharing agreements are used to 
allocate central costs to business segments on a reasonable basis.
 2020Corporate 
BankingRetail 
BankingCentral 
TreasuryShared 
ServicesUnallocated Consolidated
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Net Interest Income 56,553 29,847 334,559 (5,546) - 415,413
Net fee and commission income 14,717 48,649 1,248 10,801 - 75,414
Net trading income 2,765 12,043 37,804 - - 52,611
Other operating income 644 887 - 9,001 - 10,533
Inter segment revenue (5,863). 229,518 (223,655) - - 0
Total segment revenue 68,816 320,944 149,957 14,256 - 553,972
Segment result - - - - - -
Income tax expense (5,077) (13,269) (13,940) - - (32,286)
Profit for the period 53,626 140,153 147,240 (243,329) - 97,690
Total assets 817,675 1,055,765 3,286,993 516,813 38,548 5,715,794
Total Segment liabilities 1,263,665 2,954,757 62,614 313,173 270,961 4,865,171
Impairment losses on financial 
assets- - (23,163) - (23,163) (46,325)
Depreciation and amortisation (1,941) (13,235) (3720 (46,009) - (61,556)
Capital expenditure (127) (6,243) (14) (32,251) - (38,635)
2019Corporate 
BankingRetail 
BankingCentral 
TreasuryShared 
ServicesUnallocated Consolidated
 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Net Interest Income 37,278 2,437 263,222 (2,841)  -  300,096 
Net fee and commission income 10,191 37,832 585 10,425  - 59,033 
Net trading income  -  - 50,382  -  - 50,382 
Other operating income  -  -  - 17,516  - 17,516 
Inter segment revenue (10,943) 203,012 (192,069)  -  - -   
Total segment revenue 36,526 243,281 122,120 25,099  -   427,026 
Segment result  -     -   
Income tax expense  - -  -  (3,061)  - (3,061)
Profit for the period  32,286 118,917 100,737 (237,117)  -  14,823 
      
Total assets 826,679 641,974 2,721,809 387,197   -  4,577,659  
                         
Total Segment liabilities 931,963 2,449,379 288,486 80,242 34,205 3,784,275 
Impairment losses on 
financial assets(17,639) 2,026  -  -  - (15,614)
Depreciation and amortisation (66) (6,414)  37 (14,870) (31,959) (53,272)
Capital expenditure (281) -   - (10,678) - (10,678)2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            73         8.   INTEREST INCOME                    
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Loans and advances to banks 53,572 57,138
Loans and advances to customers                                                                              265,451 208,270
Investment securities at amortised cost 292,911 217,680
Other interest income – interest income on finance leases                17,025 8,123
628,959 491,211
8a.  NTEREST INCOME ANALYSIS
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Interest revenue calculated using effective interest method 611,934 483,088
Other interest and similar income 17,025 8,123
628,959 491,211
9.   INTEREST EXPENSE
a.   On deposits:
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Fixed/time deposits 50,758 54,320
Savings deposits 9,816 6,812
Demand & call deposits 132,977 110,879
Total interest expense on deposits 193,551 172,011
b.   On borrowed funds:
Inter-Bank Borrowing 433 95 
Long-Term Borrowings 7,574 10,871 
Interest on lease liability 11,988 8,138
19,995 19,104
Total (a+b) 213,546 191,115
10.  NET FEE AND COMMISSION INCOME
2020 2019
Fee and commission Income GH¢ ‘000 GH¢ ‘000
Commission on Turnover 26,441 26,552
Fees and Charges 58,080 45,334
Sale of Cheque Book Charges 812 878
Guarantees Charges & Commission 2,252 1,182
Total Fee and Commission Income 87,585 73,946
Fee and commission expense
Cost of Services (12,171) (14,913)
Total Fee and Commission Expense (12,171) (14,913)
Net Fee and Commission Income 75,414 59,033
All fees and commission income were earned at a point in time.74         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
11.   NET TRADING INCOME
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Foreign Exchange
Translation gains 18,089 18,777
Transaction gains 34,522 31,605
52,611 50,382
12.  OTHER OPERATING INCOME
Bad debts recovered 5,944 801 
Dividends from investments 186 1,302 
Other income* 4,403 15,413
Total 10,533 17,516
* Other income is made up of unutilized provisions on expenses                       
13.   IMPAIRMENT LOSS ON FINANCIAL ASSETS                                                         
The table below shows the Expected Credit Loss charges on financial instruments for the year recorded in the 
income statement:
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Letter of credit and guarantee 14,591 -   - 14,591
Undrawn commitments (1,503) - - (1,503)
Due from Banks 376 - - 376
Loans and advances (31,624) 4,284 37,039 9,699
At 31 December 2020 (18,160) 4,284 37,039 23,163
2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Letter of credit and guarantee (3,746) (3,746)
Undrawn commitments (2,280) - - (2,280)
Due from Banks (883) - - (883)
Loans and advances (19,506) (4.141) 46,170 22,523
 At 31 December 2019 (26,415) (4.141) 46,170 15,614
14.   PERSONNEL EXPENSES
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Salaries and wage 128,518 114,802
Pension costs - (Defined contribution scheme to SSNIT) 12,889 11,698
Staff Provident Fund (Defined Contribution Scheme) 7,474 10,867
Staff fuel expenses 33,613 32,904
Medical expenses 6,566 6,570
Canteen expenses 8,042 5,011
Training expenses 452 864
Uniform                                                                                                                                                                                                              19,501 17,869
Other staff related costs* 16,413 6,126
233,468 206,711
*Other staff related costs comprise insurance expenses on personnel, discount on staff loans and others.The number of 
persons employed by the Bank at the year-end was 1,460 (2019: 1,489).2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            75         15.   OTHER OPERATING EXPENSES
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Occupancy Cost 22,966 27,247
Auditors Remuneration 1,511 999
Donations and Social Responsibility 4,025 2,115
Motor Vehicle Running Expenses 10,527 11,053
General and Administrative Expenses 31,243 27,461
Information Technology Expenses                                                                         49,231 42,452
Others* 18,593 22,218
138,096 133,545
Others* consist of deposit insurance premium and clearing house expenses
16.    DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Depreciation of Property, Plant and equipment 12,769 13,626
Amortisation of intangible assets 8,979 7,703
Depreciation of Right of use asset 39,808 31,943
61,556 53,272
17.   EARNINGS PER SHARE
Earnings per share is calculated by dividing the net profit attributable to equity holders of the Bank by the weighted 
average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Profit after tax     65,403 14,823
Number of ordinary shares 346,952 261,721
Weighted average number of shares 346,952 261,721
Earnings per share:
Basic (GH¢)                                                                                                         0.1885 0.0566
Diluted (GH¢) 0.1885 0.043
18.   CASH AND BANK BALANCE
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
(i)     Cash on hand 152,149 119,433
Balances with Bank of Ghana* 366,673 387,259
Nostro Balances** 107,571 108,181
Deposits and balances due from banking 
institution 129,363 312,213
Cash and bank balance 755,756 927,086
* Included in balances with bank of Ghana is mandatory reserve of GH¢ 342,482 (2019GH¢ 339,221)
**Included in the Nostro balance is a restricted amount of GH¢ 28,537 (2019: GH¢ 21,000)76         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
19.   DUE FROM OTHER BANKS
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Placements with other banks 312,220 296,822
Less: Write off - (22,180)
Allowance for impairment losses (3,122) (2,747)
309,098 271,895
Placement amount written off   
Placement amount written off was as a result of renegotiated settlement agreement reached with CBG over the bank’s 
placement with the default Unique Bank and Sovereign bank which have consolidated into CBG bank.
19.1    CREDIT RISK QUALITY OF DUE FROM BANKS BALANCES
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk based on the Bank’s internal credit 
rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of impairment allowances.
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Performing
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 312,220 - - 312,220
Grade 4-5 - - - -
Non-performing - - - -
Grade 6: - - - -
Grade 7 - - - -
Grade 8  -  -  -  -
At 31 December 2020 312,220  -  - 312,220
2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Performing - - - -
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 274,643 - - 274,643
Grade 4-5 - - - -
Non-performing - - - -
Grade 6: - - - -
Grade 7 - - - -
Grade 8 - - - -
At 31 December 2019 274,643 - - 274,643
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to due from banks measured at amortised cost is, as 
follows:
     2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2020 274,642      - 274,642  
New assets originated or purchased -    -  - -   
Interest accrued 37,578 37,578 
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)-   - - -   
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 2 -   -   - -   
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2020 312,220 - - 312,2202020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            77          2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2019 - 362,968 - 362,968
New assets originated or purchased - - - -
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(66,146) - - (66,146)
Write off (22,180) - - (22,180)
Transfers to Stage 1 362,968 (362,968) - -
-Transfers to Stage 2 - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2019 274,642 - - 274,642
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to due from banks is, as follows:
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2020 2,747 - - 2,747
New assets originated or purchased - - - -
Interest accrued 375 - - 375
Transfers to Stage 1 -   - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 -   - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
Written off/ recovery - - - -
At 31 December 2020 3,122 - - 3,122
2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 1 January 2019 - 3,360 - 3,360
New assets originated or purchased - - - -
Transfers to Stage 1 3,630 (3,630) - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
Written off/ recovery (883) - - (883)
At 31 December 2019 2,747 - - 2,747
20.   INVESTMENT SECURITIES
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Treasury bills  (a)
14 Day Treasury Bills 359,992 462,156
56 Day Treasury Bills                                                                          305,280 517,267
91 Day Treasury Bills                                                                                                 - -
182 Day Treasury Bills 1,012,224 282,534
Treasury Notes 91,102 50,702
1,768,598 1,312,659
Government bonds as well as Treasury Bills are classified as financial assets at amortized cost as the business 
model is to hold the financial assets to collect contractual cash flows representing solely payments of principal 
and interest.
The average interest rate on treasury bills at 31 December 2020 was 15.11% (2019: 14.72%) and the rate for 
treasury bonds at 31 December 2020 was 19.97% (2019: 19.38%).78         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
20.1.     CREDIT RISK QUALITY OF INVESTMENT SECURITIES (DEBT INSTRUMENT)
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk of investment Securities (Debt 
Instruments) measured at amortised cost based on the Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage 
classification. The amounts presented are gross of impairment allowances.
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 2,223,189 - - 2,223,189
Grade 4-5 - - - -
Grade 6: - - - -
Grade 7 - - - -
Grade 8 - - - -
At 31 December 2020 2,223,189 2,223,189 2,223,189 2,223,189
2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 1,522,828 1,522,828
Grade 4-5 - -
Grade 6: - - -
Grade 7 - - -
Grade 8 - - - -
At 31 December 2019 1,522,828 -  - 1,522,828
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to Debt instruments measured at 
amortised cost is, as follows:
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 20201,522,828 - - 1,522,828
New assets originated or purchased 2,005,588 - - 2,005,588
Interest accrued 292,911 - - 292,911
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(1,599,187) - - (1,599,187)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2020 2,222,139 - - 2,222,139
2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2019972,069 - - 972,069
New assets originated or purchased 333,079 - - 333,079
Interest accrued 217,680 - - 217,680
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)- - - -
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2019 1,522,828 - - 1,522,8282020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            79         An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to Debt instruments measured at amortised cost 
is, as follows: 
Instruments under this category were issued by the central bank and government. Expected credit loss for these 
instruments were assessed to be insignificant.
21.   LOANS AND ADVANCES TO CUSTOMERS
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢ ’000
Overdrafts 515,946 418,445
Loans 1,689,092 1,439,604
Lease receivable 113,326 58,726
Gross loans and advances 2,318,364 1,916,775
Provision for impaired loans and advances
- Specific (348,497) (380,121)
- Collective (57,879) (68,001)
1,911,988 1,468,653
The above constitute loans and advances to customers and staff.  
Staff loans amounted to GH¢ 93,404 (2019: GH¢37,906).
The investment in lease receivables is analyzed as follows:
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Less than 1 year 10,947 37,408
Between 1 year and 5 years 102,379 21,318
113,326 58,726
Key ratios on loans and advances
• The total impairment for the year represents 17.53% of gross loans at the year-end (2019: 23.38%)
• Loan loss provision ratio is 17.53% of gross advances (2019: 23.29%)
• Gross Non-performing loans ratio per Bank of Ghana requirement is 34.4% (2019:41.72%)
• Fifty (50) largest exposures (gross funded and non-funded) to total exposures is 39.54% (2019: 75%)
2020 2019
a) Analysis by maturity GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Maturing within one year                                                                     997,130 1,060,387
Between one to five years 890,098 452,125
More than five years 431,136 404,263
2,318,364 1,916,775
Impairment of loans and advances
At 1 January 448,122 425,598
IFRS 9 Impact                                                                                                                                           
                                             -   -   
Additional impairment charge during the year 9,699 22524
Write off                                                                                                                                (51,445) -
406,376 448,12280         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
21.1. Impairment allowance for loans and advances to customers measured at amortised cost
21.1.1 Expected credit losses on loans and advances
 The table below shows an analysis of the expected credit losses on loans and advances based the class of  
 financial assets.
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Agric Loans 4,907 2,773 87,803 95,483
Retail loans 2,555 322 79,446 82,323
Corporate loans 27,112 20,211 181,247 228,570
34,574 23,306 348,496 406,376
2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Agric Loans 4,465 1,802 100,357 106,624 
Retail loans 10,057 1,583 88,546 100,186 
Corporate loans 34,458 15,636 191,218 241,312 
48,980 19,021 380,121 448,122
21.2 CREDIT RISK QUALITY OF LOANS AND ADVANCE
21.2.1   Agric loans
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk of Agric loans based on the 
Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of 
impairment allowances.
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 278,897 - - 278,897
Grade 4-5 - 17,053 - 17,053
Grade 6: - - 2,057 2,057
Grade 7 - - 2,894 2,894
Grade 8 - - 148,781 148,781
At 31 December 2020 278,897 17,053 153,732 449,682
2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 265,186 - - 265,186
Grade 4-5 - 7,249 - 7,249
Grade 6: - - 3,638 3,638
Grade 7 - - 3,063 3,063
Grade 8 - - 226,917 226,917
At 31 December 2019 265,186 7,249 233,618 506,053
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to Agric loan is as follows:
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3   Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2020265,187 7,249 233,617 506,053  
New assets originated or purchased 39,321 9,804  -   49,125 
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(25,611) - (57,400) (81,011)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 2 - -   - -   
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -   
Amount written off - - (22,485) (22,485)
At 31 December 2020 278,897 17,053 153,732 449,6822020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            81         2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2019191,015  1,017 231,602  423,634 
New assets originated or purchased 167,409 - - 167,409 
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(69,865) -   (15,125) (84,990)
Transfers to Stage 1 (1,461) - 1,461 -
Transfers to Stage 2 (6,232) 6,232 - -   
Transfers to Stage 3 (15,679) - 15,679 -   
Amount written off - - - -
At 31 December 2019 265,187 7,249 233,617 506,053
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to Agric loan is, as follows:
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 20204,465 1,802 100,357 106,624
New assets originated or purchased 577 558 - 1,135
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(389)  - (13,802) (14,191)
Re -measurement of loss allowance 254 413 1,248 1,915
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -   
Loan Written off - - - -   
At 31 December 2020 4,907 2,773 87,803 95,483
2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3   Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 20197,469 2,197 50,366  60,032  
New assets originated or purchased 50,077  -  - 50,077 
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(40,550) (3,736)  34,118 (10,168)
Impact on Expected Credit loss  -  -  6,683  6,683 
Transfers to Stage 1 (783)  -  783  - 
Transfers to Stage 2 (3,341) 3,341  -  - 
Transfers to Stage 3 (8,407)  -  8,407  - 
Loan Written off  -  -  -  - 
At 31 December 2019 4,465 1,802 100,357 106,624
21.2.2  Corporate loans
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk of Corporate loans based on 
the Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of 
impairment allowances.
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 762,212 - - 762,212
Grade 4-5 - 105,532 - 105,532
Grade 6: - - 68,441 68,441
Grade 7 - - 86,664 86,664
Grade 8 - - 273,395 273,395
At 31 December 2020 762,212 105,532 428,500 1,296,24482         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 561,451 - - 561,451
Grade 4-5 - 48,735 - 48,735
Grade 6: - - 29,103 29,103
Grade 7 - - 148,971 148,971
Grade 8 - - 175,966 175,966
At 31 December 2019 561,451 48,735 354,040 964,226
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to Corporate loan is, as follows:
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2020561,451 48,735 354,040 964,226
New assets originated or purchased 529,794  56,796  160,590 747,180
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(388,447) - - (388,447)
Transfers to Stage 1 -   -   -   -
Transfers to Stage 2 -   -   -   -
Transfers to Stage 3 -   -   -   -
Amount written off - - (26,715) (26,715)
At 31 December 2020 702,798 105,531 487,915 1,296,244
2019  Stage 1  Stage 2  Stage 3  Total
 GH¢’000  GH¢’000  GH¢’000  GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2019322,055 17,536 358,596 698,187 
New assets originated or purchased 378,912 -   - 378,912 
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(103,761) -     (9,112) (112,873)
Transfers to Stage 1 -  -    -    -   
Transfers to Stage 2 (31,199)  31,199 -    -   
Transfers to Stage 3 (4,556) -     4,556 -   
Amount written off -  -  -  -  
At 31 December 2019 561,451 48,735 354,040 964,226 
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to Corporate loan is, as follows:
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 202034,458 15,636 191,218 241,312
New assets originated or purchased 14,686 2,462  5,225 22,373
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(37,596) - - (37,596)
Re -measurement of loss allowance 15,564 2,113 11,519 29,196
Transfers to Stage 1 -   -   -   -   
Transfers to Stage 2 -   -   -   -   
Transfers to Stage 3 -   -   -   -   
Loan Written off -   -   (26,715) (26,715)
At 31 December 2020 27,112 20,211 181,247 228,5702020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            83         2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 201922,599 21,423 161,768  205,790  
New assets originated or purchased 20,422  -  - 20,422 
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(6,368) (7,702)  - (14,070)
Impact on Expected Credit loss -  29,170 29,170 
Transfers to Stage 1 -  -  -   -    
Transfers to Stage 2 (1,915) (1,915)     -    
Transfers to Stage 3 (280)  280 -    
Loan Written off -  -  - - 
At 31 December 2019 34,458 15,636 191,218 241,312
21.2.3   Retail loans
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk of Retail loans based on 
the Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts presented are gross of 
impairment allowances.
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 480,838 - - 480,838
Grade 4-5 - 12,193 - 12,193
Grade 6: - - 12,619 12,619
Grade 7 - - 2,657 2,657
Grade 8 - - 64,131 64,131
At 31 December 2020 480,838 12,193 79,408 572,438
2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 312,670 - - 312,670
Grade 4-5 - 15,714 - 15,714
Grade 6: - - 9,643 9,643
Grade 7 - - 5,917 5,917
Grade 8 - - 102,551 102,551
At 31 December 2019 312,670 15,714 118,111 446,495
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to Retail loan is, as follows:
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2020312,670 15,714 118,111 446,495
New assets originated or purchased 342,573 - - 342,573
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(174,405) (3,521) (36,459) (214,385)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
Amount written off - - (2,245) (2,245)
At 31 December 2020 480,838 12,193 79,407 572,43884         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2019256,043 3,960 112,591 372,594 
New assets originated or purchased 240,842  - - 240,842 
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(151,162) (15,779) -   (166,941)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -   
Transfers to Stage 2 (27,533) 27.533 -   -   
Transfers to Stage 3 (5,520) - 5,520 - 
Amount written off - - - -
At 31 December 2019 312,670 15,714 118,111  446,495 
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to Retail loan is, as follows:
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 202010,058 1,583 88,546 100,187
New assets originated or purchased 13,839 - - 13,839
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(33,973) (2,025) (15,175) (51,174)
Re -measurement of loss allowance 12,631 764 8,321 21,716
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
Loan Written off - - (2,245) (2,245)
At 31 December 2020 2,555 322 79,446 82,323
2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 201935,725 2,236 121,815 159,776
New assets originated or purchased 9,944 1,380 - 11,324
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(21,730) (7,490) (54,515) (83,735)
Impact on Expected Credit loss - 5,457 7,365 12,822
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 (13,881) - 13,881 -
Loan Written off - - - -
At 31 December 2019 10,058 1,583 88,546 100,187
22.    INVESTMENT (OTHER THAN SECURITIES): FAIR VALUE THROUGH OCI
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢ ’000
At 1 January                                                        102,322 95,861
Exchange difference                                                                                                                                       
                                         20 145
Fair value adjustments (note 40) (10,450) 6,316
At 31 December 91,892 102,3222020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            85         23.   INVESTMENT IN ASSOCIATE COMPANIES
The Bank has one associate, Activity Venture Finance Company (AVF) that is immaterial to the Bank, which is 
equity accounted for.
Activity Venture Finance Co
The relationship with the Bank To help start-ups with high potential and risk
Principal place of business/country of incorporation Accra, Ghana
Ownership interest/voting rights 20%/20%
Fair value of ownership interest (if listed) N/A
The entity has been dormant for the past 36 months, the investment has been fully impaired.
24.   INCOME TAX
24.1   INCOME TAX EXPENSE RECOGNISED IN PROFIT OR LOSS
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Current year income tax – 14,538 9,268
Deferred tax 17,748 (6,207)
32,286 3,061
24.2   CORPORATION TAX ASSET
Balance at 
1 January Payment 
during the 
yearCharge/credit 
for the year Balance at 
31 December
Income tax GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
2019 (5,020) -   307  (4,713)
2020 - (9,796) 9,347 (449)
(5,020) (9,796) 9,654 (5,162)
                   
National Stabilization Levy (614) (1,507) 4,884 2,763
                
Total tax (5,634) (11,303) 14,538 (2,399)
24.3   EFFECTIVE TAX RECONCILIATION
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Profit before tax 97,689 17,885
Income tax using domestic tax rate (25%) 24,422 4,471
Non-deductible expenses 26,841 21,637
Tax on exempt income (35,054) (10,850)
Income subjected to tax at a different rate @20% (63) (330)86         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
Allowable expenses (not through P&L) (6,492) (6,513)
National fiscal stabilization levy 4,884 853
Deferred tax 17,748 (6,207)
32,286 3,061
Effective tax rate 33.05% 17.11%
24.4   DEFERRED TAX ASSET
The following table shows deferred tax recorded in the statement of financial position
Deferred tax assets As at 
1 January 
2020Income 
statementOCI As at 
31 December 
2020
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000  GH¢’000 
Property, equipment, and intangible assets (15,892) (1,090) - (16,982)
Impairment allowance for loans and advances 94,836 (16,658) - 78,178
Investment (other than securities) (20,055) - 2,613 (17,442)
Balance 31 December 58,889 (17,748) 2,613 43,754
Deferred tax assets As at 
1 January 
2019Income 
statementOCI As at 
31 December 
2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 
Property, plant and equipment (33,661) 17,770 - (15,891)
Impairment allowance for loans and advances 106,399 (11,563) - 94,836
Investment (other than securities) (18,476) - (1,579) (20,055)
Balance 31 December 54,262 (6,207) (1,579) 58,890
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Balance at 1 January 58,889 54,262
Charged to profit or loss (17,748) 6,207 
Charged to OCI 2,613 (1,579)
Balance 31 December 43,754 58,890
25.     INTANGIBLE ASSETS
2020 Software Work In-Progress Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost
At 1 January 2020 64,667 - 64,667
Acquisitions 153 25,729 25,882
Transfer 25,729 (25,729) -
90,549 - 90,549
Accumulated amortisation2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            87         At 1 January 2020 43,869 - 43,869
Charge for the year 8,979 - 8,979
At 31 December 2020 52,848 - 52,848
Net Book Value
At 31 December 2020 37,701 - 37,701
2019 Software Work In-Progress Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost
At 1 January 2019 64,632 - 64,632
Acquisitions 35 - 35
64,667 - 64,667
Amortisation
At 1 January 2019 36,166 - 36,166
Charge for the year 7,703 - 7,703
At 31 December 2019 43,869 - 43,869
Net Book Value
At 31 December 2019 20,798 - 20,798
Work-in-progress
• There was no Work-in-progress at the end of the year. (2019:nil)  
• No impairment losses on intangible assets were recognized during the year (2019:nil)
• There were no capitalized borrowing costs related to intangible assets during the year (2019:nil)
• There were no restrictions on title and intangible assets pledged as security for liabilities during the year 
(2019:nil)
26.   OTHER ASSETS
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Advance payment 662 58
Pre payments 11,902 10,193
Sundry receivables 27,590 5,487
L e a s e  d e p o s i t s  f r o m  A g r i d e v                                                                                                        19,313 18,564
Agric Input Stock*                                                                                                  - 18,722
Others**                                                                                                                                             2,275 14,355
31-Dec 61,742 67,379
Current 50,282 48,815
Non-current 11,460 18,564
61,742 67,379
*This was measured at the lower of cost and net realizable value.
**Sundry receivable and others represent reimbursable from money transfer counterparties and stationery stock88         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
27.   PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT
2020 Land & 
BuildingComputers Furniture & 
EquipmentMotor   
VehiclesCapital 
W I PLeasehold 
ImprovementTotal
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost/Valuation 
At 1 January 2020 93,221 29,812 20,783 7,745 2,225 28,714 182,500
Additions 21 1,659 2,470 - 8,504 97 12,751
Disposal  -   28 - - - - 28
Transfers 157 2,071 506 66 4,958 2,158 -
At 31 December 2020 93,399 33,570 23,759 7,811 5,771 30,969 195,279
Accumulated Depreciation
At 1 January 2020 20,042 23,395 14,615 5,358 - 23,328 86,738
Charge for the year 4,551 2,055 2,493 1,313 - 2,357 12,769
Disposal - 28 - - - - 28
At 31 December 2020 24,593 25,422 17,108 6,671 - 25,685 99,479
Net Book Value
At 31 December 2020 68,806 8,148 6,651 1,140 5,771 5,284 95,800
2019 Land & 
BuildingComputers Furniture & 
EquipmentMotor   
VehiclesCapital 
W I PLeasehold 
ImprovementTotal
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost/Valuation 
At 1 January 2019 92,408 26,720 18,128 8,021 1,788 26,884 173,949
Additions 35 2,705 2,594 517 5,217 38 11,106
Disposal  -   -   (80) (860) - -   (940)
Transfers 888 1,810 223 66 (4,776) 1,789 -
Write Offs (110) (1,419) (81)  -   (1) -   (1,611)
At 31 December 2019 93,221 29,816 20,784 7,744 2,228 28,711 182,504
Depreciation
At 1 January 2019 15,508 23,287 12,773 3,797 - 19,738 75,103
Charge for the year 4,534 1,518 1,902 2,082 - 3,590 13,626
Released on Disposal/
Revaluation-   - (41) (521) - - (562)
Write Offs - (1,410) (19) - - - (1,429)
At 31 December 2019 20,042 23,395 14,615 5,358 - 23,328 86,738
Net Book Value
At 31 December 2019                                 73,179 6,421 6,169 2,386 2,228 5,383 95,766
Cost component of revalued property
If the land and buildings were stated on a historical cost basis, the amounts would have been as follows:
               2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost 13,001 12,790
Accumulated depreciation (3,614) (2,974)
9,387 9,8162020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            89         Disposal Schedule
Cost and Accumulated depreciation
The cost and accumulated depreciation of assets disposed is made up of cost of disposals and write-offs and 
their corresponding accumulated depreciation.
2020 Computers Motor & Vehicle Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost 28 - 28
Accumulated depreciation (28) - (28)
Net book value - - -
Proceeds - - -
Profit/(Loss) on disposal - - -
2019 Furniture & Equipment Motor & Vehicle Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost 80 860 940
Accumulated depreciation (41) (521) (562)
Net book value 39 339 378
Proceeds 61 334 395
Profit/Loss on disposal 22 (5) 17
None of the property and equipment of the Bank had been pledged as security for liabilities and there were no 
restrictions on the title of any of the Bank’s property and equipment at the reporting date and at the end of the 
previous year. Capital commitments not provided for in the financial statements as at 31 December 2020 was 
nil. (2019: Nil).
28.       RIGHT OF USE ASSETS
The Bank leases land and buildings. Information about leases for which the Company is a lessee is presented 
below.
Rental space Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost
At 1 January 2020 68,351 68,351
Additions 186,925 186,925
At 31 December 2020 255,276 255,276
Accumulated depreciation
At 1 January 2020 31,943 31,943
Charge for the year 39,808 39,808
At 31 December 2020 71,751 71,751
Net Book Value
At 31 December 2020                                183,525 183,52590         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
2019 Rental space Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Cost/Valuation 
At 1 January 2019 (Transfer from pre payment) 11,103 11,103
Additions 57,248 57,248
Termination of lease - -
At 31 December 2019 68,351 68,351
Depreciation
At 1 January 2019 - -
Charge for the year 31,943 31,943
Termination of lease - -
At 31 December 2019 31,943 31,943
Net Book Value
At 31 December 2019                                 36,408 36,408
29.   CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’ 000
Cash and bank balance 727,221 906,085
14-Day/91-Day Treasury Bill 665,272 979,423
Cash and cash equivalent in statement of cash flows 1,392,493 1,885,508
Included in the cash and cash equivalent is an amount of GH¢ 665,272 (2019: 979,423) which has been 
disclosed as part of Investments Securities in Note 20.
Included in balances with Bank of Ghana above is an amount of GH¢357 (2019: GH¢339,209) mandatory 
reserve deposits representing 10% of the Bank’s total deposits.
30.   BORROWED FUNDS
               2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Government of Ghana 65,440 65,720
Central Bank of Ghana 11,988 11,668
Other Financial Institutions 46,673 39,235
AFD/Rubber Phase IV and V 189,072 160,995
Total 313,173 277,618
2020Government 
of GhanaCentral 
BankFinancial 
InstitutionsAFD/Rubber 
Phase IV&VTotal
Balance as at 1 January 2020 65,720 11,668 39,235 160,995 277,618
Additions 1,170 132 137,586 31,059 169,947
Interest 1,782 344 313 425.16 2,864
Payment (3,232) (156) (130,461) (3,407) (137,256)
Balance as at 31 December 2020 65,440 11,988 46,673 189,072 313,173
2019 Government 
of GhanaCentral 
BankFinancial 
InstitutionsAFD/Rubber 
Phase IV&VTotal
Balance as at 1 January 2019 67,229 8,425 42,027 145,837 263,518
Additions 714 1,753 126,653 24,489 153,609
Interest 2,382 1,490 95 6,999 10,966
Payment (4,605)  - (129,540) (16,330) (150,475)
Balance as at 31 December 2019 65,720 11,668 39,235 160,995 277,618 2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            91         Central Bank
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
IFAD SCIMP 1,720 611
IDA/BADEA 1,724 2,516
SMALL SCALE IRR.DEV PROJECTS 653 279
CFD Loan to GREL 364 150
IFAD/MEST Rural Ent. 534 207
IFAD /UWADEP 564 162
ADB/BADEA/BOVID 6,429 7,743
11,988 11,668
Government of Ghana  
This consists of multiple facilities granted to the Bank to finance food crops, non-traditional exports, agro industry 
as well as institutional support. Interest rates range from 1.8% - 5% with maturities ranging from 2018 to 2051. 
The disclosure is based on the specific project the loan was meant for .
Details of these borrowings are shown below:  
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
ADF Projects 44,523 32,154
EDAIF 6,471 10,514
AFD/MOFA 13,502 22,581
AfDB/KP.IRR. Projects 944 471
65,440 65,720
Financial institutions
These borrowings are for liquidity management purposes. Interest rate ranges from 15% to 16.5% and maturity 
is usually within one year.
Details of the borrowings from financial institutions are shown below:
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
SSNIT - -
First Banc 1,095 23,035
Bora Capital - 2,535
CIDAN Investment 2,439 2,044
SEM CAPITAL - 1,382
GHIB 43,139 9,317
Interest on Borrowing - 922
46,673 39,235
Others
AFD - The general purpose of the credit facility is to finance long term loans dedicated to the Rubber Out 
grower Plantation Programme (ROPP).  Average Interest is at a rate of 2.07% maturing in 2027.
Details of other borrowings are shown below:
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
AFD/Rubber Phase IV 189,072 160,99592         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
31.   DEPOSITS FROM CUSTOMERS
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Savings Deposits 704,128 523,335
Demand and Call Deposits 3,163,107 2,409,345
Fixed/Time Deposits 413,802 459,529
4,281,037 3,392,209
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Customer deposits
Maturity analysis of customer deposits
From Government and Parastatals:
Payable within 90 days 274,063 295,766
Payable after 90 days and within one year                                          188,468 101,675
462,531 397,441
From Private Sector and individuals:
Payable within 90 days 1,997,856 1,591,111
Payable after 90 days and within one-year 1,820,650 1,403,657
3,818,506 2,994,768
4,281,037 3,392,209
Twenty largest depositors to total deposit ratio is 23.52% (2019: 23.87%)
32.   OTHER LIABILITIES
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Expected Credit losses on contingent liabilities 24,811 11,723 
Managed funds 5,356 2,449 
Payables 23,397 31,692 
Provident fund 2,912 7,119 
Statutory Deductions 7,243 2,254 
Visa and Point of sales settlement 10,100 8,841 
Accruals 13,305 14,105
Staff long service awards (i) 2,013 2,060
89,137 80,243
Current 49,243 51,085
Non-current 39,894 29,158
Payables* consist of Payment orders and unclaimed credit items.
Accruals ** comprise unpaid maintenance and utility expenses
i.       Movement in the liability for staff long service awards
The Bank has a long service award for its employees.  These are long service awards which accrue to employees 
based on graduated periods of uninterrupted service.  These awards accrue over the service life of employees. 
Employees leaving the service of the Bank after 5 years through retirement (both voluntary and compulsory) 
or resignation become eligible for these awards based on their current entitlement at the time of retirement or 
resignation based on their length of service. The bank has no further obligations once the staff leaves employment.2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            93         2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Liability for staff awards at 1 January 2,060 1,803
Benefits paid by the plan (124) (102)
Past service cost (405) -
Expenses recognised in profit or loss 482 359
Liability for staff awards at 31 December 2,013 2,060
2020 2019
Expenses recognised in profit and loss GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Current Service Cost                                                              391 36
Interest Cost                                                      91 323
                                                                                     482 359
Actuarial assumptions
The following are the principal assumptions at the reporting date.
Discount rate 19.1% 19%
General inflation rate 10.4% 13%
Assumptions regarding future mortality rates are based on published statistics and mortality tables.
33.   LEASE LIABILITY   
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
As at 1 January 34,205
Additions 169,917 57,248
Accretion of interest 11,988 2,688 
Exchange difference 374 5,450 
Payments (34,660) (31,181)
As at 31 December 181,824 34,205
The Bank had total cash outflows with regard to leases liabilities is GH¢34,660 (2019: GH¢31,181).  
Future minimum lease payments under non–cancellable operating leases as at 31 December were as follows :
Maturity analysis of lease liability 2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Within one year 39,070 34,174 
After one year but not more than five years 166,619 8,247 
More than five years 100,200 -
Total 305,889 42,42194         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
34.       STATED CAPITAL
2020 2019
No. of Shares Proceeds No. of Shares Proceeds
Authorized: GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Ordinary shares of no-par value 10,000,000,000 10,000,000,000
Issued:
Issued for Cash 346,952,253 698,700 261,721,483 421,700
346,952,253 698,700 261,721,483 421,700
Reconciliation
2020 2019
No. of Shares Proceeds No. of Shares Proceeds
Authorized: GH¢’000 GH¢’000 
Balance as at 1 January 261,721,483 421,700 230,923,223 275,100 
Issued Shares 85,230,770 277,000 30,798,260 146,600
Balance as at 31 December 346,952,253 698,700 261,721,483 421,700 
35.       DEPOSIT FOR SHARES
 2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Deposit for Shares - 277,000
- 277,000
 Deposit for Shares relates to the conversion of Bank of Ghana’s five-year Subordinated Term Debt of GH¢ 
150,000,000 into equity in favor of its subsidiary, Financial Investment Trust (FIT) which is a shareholder of the 
Bank. Furthermore, Ghana Amalgamated Trust brought in additional capital of GH¢127million, bringing the total 
to GH¢277,000,000.
 The two institutions were issued shares totally 85,230,770 subsequent to the year end. The registration of the 
shares with the Registrar General and the Central Securities Depository have been completed in January 2020, 
this brings the total shares issued to 346,952,253
36.       ACCUMULATED LOSSES
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
At 1 January (289,349) (294,086)
Transfer to credit risk reserve 4,739 9,813
Transfer to statutory reserve (32,702) (7,412)
Stamped duty (327) -
Transaction cost related to right issue                                                                                                                                  - (12,487)
Profit for the year 65,403 14,823
Total (252,236) (289,349)
37.       REVALUATION RESREVE
This reserve comprises the cumulative net change in the fair value of property and equipment.
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
At 1 January 57,531 57,531
At 31 December 57,531 57,5312020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            95         38.       STATUTORY RESERVE
Statutory reserve represents cumulative amounts set aside from annual profits after tax required under section 
34(i) of the Banks and Specialised Deposit–Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930).  The proportion of net profits 
transferred to reserves ranges from 12.5% to 50% of net profit after tax, depending on the relationship that the 
balance on statutory reserves bears to paid up capital.
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
At 1 January 108,512 101,100
Transfer from Retained earnings 32,702 7,412
At 31 December 141,214 108,512
39.       CREDIT RISK RESERVE
The credit risk reserve is a non-distributable reserve required by Bank of Ghana to account for difference 
between impairment loss on financial assets as per IFRS and the specific and the general impairment loss on 
loans and advances and contingent liabilities per the Central Bank’ s prudential guidelines.
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
At 1 January 157,827 167,640
Transfer (to) Retained earnings (4,739) (9,813)
At 31 December 153,088 157,827
Reconciliation between Bank of Ghana impairment allowance and IFRS impairment
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Bank of Ghana impairment allowance for 
loans and advances                               559,464 605,949
IFRS Impairment for loans and advances at 
31 December                                   (406,376) (448,122)
Credit risk reserve at 31 December 153,088 157,827
40.          FAIR VALUE THROUGH OCI
 2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
At 1 January 60,163 55,426
Fair value adjustment, net of tax (Note 40 ii) (7,837) 4,737
At 31 December 52,326 60,163
ii. The Fair Value Reserves includes the cumulative change in the fair value of equity investments until the 
investment is derecognized or impaired.  Fair value through other comprehensive income net of tax is made up 
of:
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Investment (other than securities) (10,450) 6,316
Deferred Tax                                                                                                                              2,613 (1,579)
Total 7,837 4,73796         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
41.         CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS INCLUDING OFF BALANCE SHEET ITEMS
In common with other banks, the Bank conducts business involving acceptances, guarantees, performances 
and indemnities.  The majority of these facilities are offset by corresponding obligations of third parties. The 
Bank also holds certain securities in its own name on behalf of customers. The values of these securities are 
not recognised in the statement of financial position.
Letters of credit commit the Bank to make payments to third parties, on production of documents, which are 
subsequently reimbursed by customers.
Guarantees are generally written by a bank to support performance by a customer to third parties. The Bank will 
only be required to meet these obligations in the event of customer ’s default.
Contingencies and commitments in the financial statements as at 31 December 2020 in respect of the above 
amounted to GH¢ 298,111 (2019: GH¢352,575), as detailed below:
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’00
Guarantees and indemnities 244,331 159,235
Letters of credit 53,780 207,865
298,111 367,100
41.1     CREDIT RISK QUALITY OF LETTER OF CREDIT, COMMITMENTS AND GUARANTEES
The table below shows the credit quality and the maximum exposure to credit risk of credit, commitments and 
guarantees based on the Bank’s internal credit rating system and year-end stage classification. The amounts 
presented are gross of impairment allowances.
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 53,780 - - 53,780
Grade 4-5 244,331 - - 244,331
Grade 6 - - - -
Grade 7 - - - -
Grade 8 - - - -
At 31 December 2020 298,111 - - 298,111
2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Grade 1-3: low fair risk 207,865 - - 207,865
Grade 4-5 159,235 - - 159,235
Grade 6 - - - -
Grade 7 - - - -
Grade 8 - - - -
At 31 December 2019 367,100 - - 367,100
An analysis of changes in the gross carrying amount in relation to credit, commitments and guarantees 
is as follows:
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2020367,100 - - 367,100
New assets originated or purchased - - - -2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            97         Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(68,990) - - (68,990)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2020 298,111 - - 298,111
2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 2019374,807 - - 374,807
New assets originated or purchased - - - -
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(7,707) - - (7,707)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2019 367,100 - - 367,100
An analysis of changes in the ECL allowances in relation to credit, commitments and guarantees is  as 
follows:
2020 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 202011,723 - - 11,723
New assets originated or purchased 13,088 - - 13,088
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)-   - - -   
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2020 24,811 - - 24,811
2019 Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Total
GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Gross carrying amount as at 
1 January 201917,751 - - 17,751
New assets originated or purchased - - - -
Assets derecognised or repaid 
(excluding write offs)(6,028) - - (6,028)
Transfers to Stage 1 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 2 - - - -
Transfers to Stage 3 - - - -
At 31 December 2019 11,723 - - 11,723 
42.       CONTINGENT LIABILITY
Pending Legal Claims
At the year-end there were 16 (2019: 21) legal cases pending against the Bank. Should judgment go in favour 
of the plaintiffs, likely claims against the Bank have been estimated at GH¢1,277 (2019: GH¢ 1,100). 
No provisions have been made in the financial statements in respect of these amounts because the Bank’s 
solicitors believe that the bank has good chance of success.98         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
43.       RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Parties are considered to be related if one party has the ability to control the other party or exercise significant 
influence over the other party in making financial or operating decisions, or one other party controls both. 
Shareholders of the entity are as follows:
Shareholders
Name of shareholder No. of shares in thousand Percentage holding (%)
Financial Investment Trust 222,218 64.05%
Government of Ghana                                                                               74,579 21.50%
Ghana Amalgamated Trust PLC 39,077 11.26%
Others                                                                                                                      11,078 3.19%
346,952 100%
At 31 December 2020 the following amounts related to transactions with the Government of Ghana
                                                                                                                           2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Government Securities 2,222,139 1,522,828
Loans and Advances 71,583 13,470
Borrowings 65,440 42,065
Others 30,973 17,034
Associated Company
The Bank provides general banking services to its associated company.  These transactions are conducted on 
similar terms to third-party transactions. There were no transactions with associated company during the period 
under consideration.
Details of investments in associated company are provided in Note 23.
Transactions with Executive Directors and key Management Personnel
Key management personnel are defined as those persons having authority and responsibility for planning, 
directing and controlling the activities of the Bank (directly or indirectly) and comprise the Directors and Senior 
Management of the Bank.
The Bank has advanced loans to some past directors as well as key management staff. No provisions have 
been made in respect of loans to the Executive Director or other members of key management personnel (or 
any connected person). 
Remuneration of Executive Directors and other key Management Personnel
The remuneration of executive directors and other key management personnel during the year were as follows:
Short term employee benefits 2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Salaries and other short- term benefits 15,950 13,865
Social security contributions 1,641 831
17,591 14,696
Remuneration of executive directors during the year amounted to GH¢ 1,453 (2019 GH¢1,030).
Details of transactions and balances between the Bank and Executive Directors and other key Management 
Personnel are as follows:
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Loans - -
Loans outstanding at 31 December 2,385 1601
Interest income 80 692020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            99         Interest rates charged on loans to staff are below market rates.  These loans are secured over the assets 
financed of the respective borrowers.  These loans are fair valued at the year end. There were no loans to the 
Executive Director in the current year.
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Deposits 11,110 8,487
Key Management’s shareholding
  No. of shares % Holding
Key management 19,627 0.01
Transactions with companies in which a Director or other members of key Management Personnel is 
related
The Executive Director is a non-executive board member of Ghana International Bank Plc (GIB).Details of 
transactions and balances between the Bank and GIB are as follows:
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Borrowings 42,930 9,317
Bank balance 52,364 35,523
Transactions with non- executive directors
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Directors’ remuneration
Fees and allowances for services as directors 1,693 1,437
Details of transactions and balances between the Bank and past non-executive directors are as follows:
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Loans
Outstanding at 1 January - 138
Net movement - 17
Outstanding at 31 December - 155
Interest income - 17
Term loans amounting to GH¢605 were granted to two directors in 2012.  The loans were granted at the Bank’s 
base rate plus 5%. The facilities expired in 2020.  The outstanding amount on the facility at 31 December 2020 
is Nil. The process of approval starts with the management credit committee before submission to the board for 
approval at which meeting the Directors excuse themselves. Subsequently the Central Bank is informed of the 
approval process. The loan was approved in 2012.
No loan or advance was granted to companies in which Directors have an interest in 2020. (2019 nill)
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Deposits 11,110 8,487100         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
Directors’ Shareholding
At 31 December 2020, the past directors named below held shares in the Bank.
Directors No. of shares % Holding
Nana Soglo Alloh IV 54,800 0.00016
Daniel Asiedu 2,000 0.000006
Dr. Adu Anane Antwi 800 -
57,600 0.000166
44.       DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLAN
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Pension scheme, 
the National Social Security Fund12,889 11,698
Provident Fund 7,474 10,867
20,363 22,565
45.       ASSETS PLEDGED AS SECURITY
At 31 December 2020 the value of government securities pledged as collateral was GH¢ NIL  (2019: NIL).
46.        COLLATERAL ACCEPTED AS SECURITY FOR ASSETS
At 31 December 2020 the value of government securities accepted as collateral that the Bank is permitted to sell 
or re-pledge in the event of default was GH¢ 116,445 (2019: GH¢172,300).
These transactions are conducted under terms that are usual and customary to standard lending, and securities 
borrowings and lending activities.
47.       NATIONAL FISCAL STABILISATION LEVY
The National Fiscal Stabilisation Levy Act 862, became effective from 12 July 2014.  Under the Act, a 5% levy 
will be charged on profit before tax and is payable quarterly.
48.       REGULATORY DISCLOSURES
i.           Non–Performing Loans Ratio
Percentage of gross non-performing loans (“substandard to loss”) to total credit/advances portfolio (gross): 
34.40% (2019: 41.72%)
ii.          Capital Requirement Directive (CRD)
The capital requirement directive at the end of December 2020 was calculated at approximately 14.87% (2019: 
16.45%)
iii.          Liquid Ratio
Percentage of liquid assets to volatile liabilities: 117.76% (2019: 144.98%)
49.       SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
At the Annual General Meeting (AGM) of the Bank in 2020 a resolution was passed to amend the name of the 
Bank from Agricultural Development Bank Limited to Agricultural Development Bank Public Limited Company-
(PLC) in accordance with section 21 of  Companies Act, 2019 (Act 992). The name change was approved by 
Bank of Ghana in January 2021, in accordance with the Banks and Specialised Deposit-Taking Institutions Act, 
2016 (Act 930).2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            101         50.1        Adjustment for non-cash items
2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Depreciation and amortization 61,556 53,272 
Impairment charge on financial assets 23,163 15,614 
Interest recognized on lease liability - 8,138
Write off on other assets
(investment and receivables)-  22,181 
Dividend received (186) (1,302)
(Gain)/loss on disposal of property and equipment - (17)
Net interest income (415,413) (300,096)
(330,880) (202,210)
50.2 Changes in operating assets and liabilities
Loans & advances (445,674) (401,264)
Other assets 5,635 (32,653)
Deposits from customers 890,656 805,944 
Restricted cash (7,537) (21,000)
Other liabilities (4,193) (5,975)
438,887 345,052
51.       NON-COMPLIANCE WITH SECTIONS OF THE BANKS AND SPECIALISED DEPOSIT-TAKING   
            INSTITUTIONS ACT, 2016 (ACT 930)
Review of Exposure Limits
Section 62 of the Banks and Specialized Deposit–Taking Institutions Act, 2016 (Act 930) requires that secured 
and non-secured facilities should not exceed 25% and 10% of the company’s net own funds respectively. The 
Bank has not breached the secured prescribed exposure limits by year end 2020.102         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
APPENDIX I
Value Added Statement 2020 2019
GH¢’000 GH¢’000
Interest earned and other operating income 769,156 615,539
Direct cost of services (363,804) (339,573)
Value added by banking services 405,352 275,965
Non-banking income 10,533 17,515
Impairment (23,163) (15,614)
Value Added 392,722 277,867
Distributed as follows:
To employees:
Directors (without executives) (1,693) (1,437)
Executive Directors 1,454 1,031
Other employees (233,236) (204,243)
(233,475) (206,711)
To Government:
Income tax (32,286) (3,061)
To providers of capital
Dividends to shareholders - -
To expansion and growth:
Depreciation (52,577) (45,568)
Amortization (8,979) (7,704)
(61,556) (53,272)
RETAINED EARNINGS 65,403 14,8242020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            103         APPENDIX II
Shareholders’ Information - Unaudited Number of Shareholders
The Bank had 446 ordinary shareholders at 31 December 2020 distributed as follows:
No. of No of % of shares
Category shareholders shares held
1-1,000 419 114,937 0.03
1,001-5,000 24 49,606 0.01
5,001-10,000 3 23,560 0.01
Above 10,000 13 346,764,150 99.95
Total 459 346,952,253 100.00
20 Largest Shareholders
Control rights: Each share is entitled to the same voting rights.
No. NAMENO. OF 
SHARES % 
1 FINANCIAL INVESTMENT TRUST 222,218,113 64.05
2 GOVERNMENT OF GHANA 74,579,327 21.50
3 GHANA AMALGAMATED TRUST PLC 39,076,924 11.26
4 ESOP 5,983,828 1.72
5 DOE, OSCAR YAO O. Y. D. 2,595,181 0.75
6 COFIE, MARK BLEWUNYO KODJO M. B. K. C. 2,100,629 0.61
7 NANA, SOGLO ALLOH IV 54,800 0.02
8  PARACELSUS PHARMACY & MARKETING  
CONSULTANCY LTD,  P. P. M. C. L. 50,000 0.01
9 DOE, OSCAR YAO O. Y. D. 36,500 0.01
10 BONDZI-SIMPSON, LESLIE 26,600 0.01
11 MR, JOHN BEKUIN-WURAPA 20,000 0.01
12 GOGO, BENJAMIN AKUETE 12,000 0.00
13 LAING, ARCHIBALD FERGUSON 10,248 0.00
14ARMAH-MENSAH, 
EDWARD IAN NII AYITEY E. I. N. A. A. 10,000 0.00
15 FIADJOE, ABLA GRACE A. G. F. 7,500 0.00
16 MARY EMMELINE SAAH,  M. E. S 6,060 0.00
17 MR, ISAIAH OFFEI-DARKO 5,000 0.00
18 DUAH, EUGENE KWAKU 4,500 0.00
19 ODAME, DESMOND YAW DYO 3,424 0.00
20 OFFEI-DARKO, ISAIAH 2,500 0.00
SUB TOTAL of TOP 20 346,803,134 99.96
Others 149,119 0.04
346,952,253 100.00104         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            105         ABOUT US
AGRIBUSINESS  
• Sector Loans
• Working Capital Loans
• Asset Finance 
• Trade Finance (Export & Import)
• Group Loans 
• Lines of Credit 
• Managed Fund 
• Nucleus-Outgrower schemes 
• Guarantees 
• Institutionally Managed Farmers loans
• Agric Value Chain Financing
CORPORATE & COMMERCIAL BANKING
• Foreign Currency Account
• Schools and Colleges Account
• Business Overdraft
• Project Account
• Guarantees
• IPC Discounting Loans
• Current and Call Accounts
• Term Loans
LEASE & ASSET FINANCE
• Fleet Finance 
• Equipment Lease 
• Asset Re-Lease (Sale and Lease back) 
• Household Asset Finance 
• Private Equipment Finance 
• Agri-Lease 
• Gold Drive Plus
TRADE SERVICES
• Advance Payments
• Import Letters of Credit
• Import Bills for Collection
• Export Letters of Credit
• Export Bills for Collection
ADB BANCASSURANCE • INSURANCE 
• Abusua Anidaso (Life and Funeral Policy)
• ADB Motor Insurance
MONEY TRANSFER
• Western Union 
• MoneyGram 
• Ria Money 
• Unity Link 
• Xpress Money 
• Transfast 
• Instant Money 
• Zeepay CONSUMER BANKING
• Current Account 
• Savings Deposit Account 
• Hybrid (Cedi) Current Account 
• Local Transfer Payment 
• Salary Account 
• Personal Loans 
• Personal Investment Plus (PIP)
• Controller (CAGD) Loans
• Mmofra Account
• Home-link Account 
• ADB Collabo/Collasave 
• ADB Online Payment Solutions
• ATM Services 
• Foreign Currency Account 
• Foreign Exchange Account
• Adwadifo Anidaso
• Institutionally Managed Personal Loans (IMPL) 
TREASURY MANAGEMENT
• Fixed (Cedi) Deposit Account
• Fixed Deposit Foreign Currency (USD, GBP & EUR)
• Primary Dealer in BOG/GOG Treasury Bill/Notes/Bonds
• Foreign Currency Deposits
• Cash Management
• International Transfers using the SWIFT System
• Foreign Exchange – Buying and Selling
• Custody Services
E-BUSINESS
• ADB Collections Solutions
• ADB Payments Solutions
• ADB Internet Banking (QuicNet)
• ADB USSD *767#
• ADB Alert Services
• ADB Visa Cards
• ADB Mobile Banking Application
• ADB Bill Payments (DSTV, GOtv, ECG & Passport)
PARASTATALS AND INSTITUTIONAL BANKING
• Government Institutions
• Ministries
• Department
• Agencies
• Strategic Banking Partnership with Corporate Institutions
• Revenue Collections
• Investment Services
• Transactional Services
EXECUTIVE BANKINGOUR BANKING SERVICES106         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            107         ACCRA WEST
Dansoman
Abeka Lapaz
Weija
Kaneshie
Bukom
Madina
Gulf House
Achimota
Kasoa
Wisconsin University
University of Ghana, Legon
Telephone: 0202506203 ext 204/205 
030- 2506201, 2506202, 2506203
ACCRA EAST
Tema Main
Tema Meridian
Spintex
Teshie
Nungua
Tema East
Tema Mankoadze
Labone Junction
Osu
Adabraka
Accra Newtown
Nima
Ring Road Central
Makola
ADB House
Ridge
Diamond House
Telephone: 030- 3216100, 3204305,
3203371, 3206396, 0244477927
CENTRAL/WESTERN/ WESTERN NORTH 
Agona Swedru
Mankessim
Assin Fosu
Cape Coast
UCC
Takoradi
Agona Nkwanta
Grel Apemanim
Sefwi Wiawso
Bonsu Nkwanta
Enchi
Sefwi Essam
Juaboso
Telephone: 03120 29068, 0246746962
BONO EAST / BONO / AHAFO ASHANTI
Sunyani
TechimanBerekum
Dormaa Ahenkro
Nkoranza
Atebubu
Kumasi Adum
Kumasi Market
Nhyiaeso
Ejisu
New Edubiase
Obuasi
Asante Bekwai
Kenyasi
Goaso
Kwapong
Prempeh II
Telephone: 032-204-5260
EASTERN / VOLTA / OTI
Koforidua
Nkawkaw
Suhum
Kade
Asiakwa
Ho
Hohoe
Kpando
Kpeve
Nkwanta
Denu
Sogakope
Juapong
Kpassa
Telephone: 036 - 2028250, 2028284, 2028289
034 - 2022292, 2022739
UPPER EAST / UPPER WEST
NORTHERN / SAVANNAH
NORTH EAST
Bolgatanga
Bawku
Navrongo
Walewale
Wa
Tumu
Bole
Tamale Main
Tamale Aboabo
Kaladan
Yendi
Savelugu
Buipe
Telephone: 037- 2022629, 2022938,
2027339, 0243283898 ABOUT US
AREA OFFICES108         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            109         ABOUT US
BRANCHES & AGENCIES
Greater-Accra Region
ABEKA LAPAZ BRANCH
Off George Bush N1 Highway, 
Near the Abrantie Spot
Tel: 030-7010373
GPS: GA-428-1771
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
ACCRA NEW TOWN BRANCH
Newtown Circle Road, Malam Atta 
Market in the Old Oxford Cinema 
Building
Tel: 030-2220989 / 0302-2220986  
GPS: GA-069-3525
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
ACHIMOTA BRANCH
Near Neoplan  Assembly Plant on the 
Achimota  Nsawam road
Tel: 030-2420038 / 030-2420036 
030-7002070
GPS: GE-373-1882
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
ADB HOUSE BRANCH
Independence Avenue after Latter 
Days Saints Church  
GPS: GA-030-6976
Tel: 030-7001997
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
DANSOMAN BRANCH
Near Dansoman Round-About, Off 
Dansoman High Street  GPS: GA-
537-1721 
Tel: 030-2312414 / 030-2311636
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
GULF HOUSE BRANCH
Main Gulf House Building on the 
Tetteh Quarshie – Legon Road.
Tel: 030 2506201 / 030 2506202
030 2506203    GPS: GA-289-5092
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
KANESHIE BRANCH
Near Kaneshie Market, Off the 
Winneba Road
Tel: 050-1569003
GPS: GA-263-8055
Email: customercare@agricbank.comWEIJA BRANCH
Near SCC Junction before
the new Shoprite 
on the Mallam- Kasoa Road
Tel: 030-2853081 / 030-2853083
GPS: GS-0166-0410
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
LABONE JUNCTION BRANCH
Labone Junction Off the 
Ring Road East, 
Near Danquah Circle
Tel: 055 2818 953  
GPS: GL-015-7692
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
ADABRAKA BRANCH
Opposite Long View Pharmacy on 
the Kojo Thompson Road   
GPS: GA-074-0708
Tel: 030-2242417   
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
MADINA BRANCH
Opposite Rawlings Park on the 
Barclays Lane
Tel: 030-2668265 / 030-2674308 / 
030-2675596
GPS: GM-016-4945
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
NIMA BRANCH
Near Nima Market, St. Kizito Parish, 
Off Nima-Mamobi Road
Tel: 0302-264 512 
GPS: GA-025-4476
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
NUNGUA BRANCH
Off Teshie – Nungua Road, 
In front of the Nungua market
Tel: 030-2712660 / 0302-717078  
GPS: GZ-023-2058
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
OSU BRANCH
Near Papaye Restaurant on 
the Oxford Street.
Tel: 030 2782386 / 030 2779696 
030-2779695 
GPS: GA-081-4642 
Email: customercare@agricbank.comRIDGE BRANCH
AFC Building, Opposite 
National Theathre on the Liberia 
Road
Tel: 0307001562 
GPS: GA-107-2442
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
RING ROAD CENTRAL 
BRANCH
On Ring Road, Next to Bust Stop 
Restaurant   GPS: GA-048-9626
Tel: 030-2229110  / 030-2239409
Email: bidun@agricbank.com
LEGON BRANCH
Credit Union Building, 
University of Ghana.
Tel: 0208-957231/0554-356399
GPS: GA-419-8111
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
WISCONSIN UNIVERSITY 
BRANCH
Wisconsin University College
No: 0243453632
GPS: GE-281-057
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
MAKOLA
Opposite Rawlings Park on the 
Barclays Lane
tel: 0302 2675596 / 0302 668265
0302 674308
GPS: GA-183-8740
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
SPINTEX ROAD BRANCH
Opposite Ghana Commercial Bank 
on the Spintex Road.
Tel: 030-2816212 / 0302816213
GPS: GZ-367-7394
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
TEMA EAST (ASHAIMAN)
Off Tema – Akosombo Road, Near 
the Ashaiman Timber market
Tel: 050-1569002 / 030-3308011
GPS: GB-011-7408
Email: customercare@agricbank.com110         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            111         TEMA MAIN BRANCH
At the fishing Harbour, Near Pioneer 
Foods, New Town   
GPS: GT-062-1117
Tel: 030-3203371 / 030-3206396
Email: nmills@agricbank.com
TEMA-MANKOADZE AGENCY
Tema Community 1, near VIP Station
Tel: 030-3204756
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
 
TEMA MERIDIAN BRANCH
Tema Community 3, 
Close to former Meridian Hotel
Tel: 030-7010321
GPS: GT – 020 -0866
Email: abasit@agricbank.com
TESHIE BRANCH
St. Anne’s Parish premises, Teshie 
Road
Tel: 0300-2712664 / 0302-712549   
GPS: GZ-018-4537
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
BUKOM ARENA  
SSNIT SPORTS EMPORIUM
SSNIT Sports Emporium, Bukom
Telephone: 055 2569 489
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
DIAMOND HOUSE BRANCH
Diamond Cement Group Building, 
Steel Works Rd, Tema
Tel: 055-9722793    
GPS: GA-107-2442
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Ashanti Region
ASHANTI BEKWAI BRANCH
Near Bekwai Post Office & Police 
Station
Tel: 032-24203157 / 032-2420315
032-242035 / 032-2420357   
GPS: AB-0000-8169
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
EJISU BRANCH
Amakom Street, Near City Style 
Building
Tel:032-2398705 / 032-2398704
032-2033481 / 032-2049576
GPS: AE-0000-1704
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
ADUM BRANCH
Nyarko Kusi Amoa Street, Near 
Central PrisonsTel: 032-2031537 / 032-2039854
032-221521
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
KUMASI-CENTRAL MARKET
BRANCH
Kumasi Zongo, behind the 
Zongo Police Station      
Tel: 032-2033481 / 032-2033461/
032-2033455 / 032-2033914
GPS: AK-038-8417
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
PREMPEH II ST. BRANCH
Prempeh Street, Near Hotel De 
Kingsway
Tel: 032-2045263 / 032-2045275
032-2045276 / 032-2045277
GPS: AK-018-6205
Email:
customnercare@agricbank.com
NEW EDUBIASE BRANCH
Near the Market
Tel: 020-6857305 / 032-219 2202 
033-2192226
GPS: A3-0000-6939
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
OBUASI BRANCH
Obuasi Main Road, Opposite 
Metro Mass Station
Tel: 032-2440701 / 032-2540700
GPS: AO-028-4692
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
NHYIAESO BRANCH
Kumasi Main Road, Nhyieso 
Roundabout, Nyarko Plaza 1
Tel: 032-2190006  / 0322190008
GPS: AK-237-5343
Email: cgaamson@agricbank.com
Bono East Region
NKORANZA  BRANCH
Opposite the main market and 
adjacent to the VRA Office, Off the 
VRA Road.
Tel: 035 -2092074 / 035 -2097313
GPS: BO-0000-5543
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
ATEBUBU BRANCH
10 metres from the main Lorry 
station, On the Atebubu-Ejura Road
Tel: 032-2099568
GPS: BA-00005-3243
Email:customercare@agricbank.comTECHIMAN BRANCH
Off the Techiman - Tamale Road, 
Near the Tamale Station
Tel: 035- 2522304 / 035- 2091080 / 
035 -2091686 GPS: BT-0013-8877
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
Ahafo Region
KENYASI BRANCH
On the Kenyasi Road, Opposite the 
Kenyasi No.1 Police Station.
Tel: 035-2094858 / 035-2197828
035-2084594  GPS: BQ-0022-8978
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
GOASO BRANCH
On Goaso Road, 100 metres away 
from the lorry stationand adjacent to 
Glory Oil Filling Station.  
GPS: BU-0003-1974
Tel: 035-2094370
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
KWAPONG BRANCH
Kwapong Main Road, 
Adjacent PBC Office
Tel: 032 -2034795  
GPS: BV-0660-8420
Email:customercare@agricbank.com
Bono Region
SUNYANI BRANCH
Sunyani-Berekum Road, Near 
Sunyani Post Office and Opposite 
Telecom.
Tel: 0352025631 / 0352023107 / 
0352027075
GPS: BS-0006-3520
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
BEREKUM BRANCH
Near the Berekum 
Training College and 
next to the Berekum Library.
Tel: 035-2222104 / 035-2222153 
035-2222507
GPS: BB-0022-8879
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
DORMAA AHENKRO BRANCH
Near the Traffic light on the 
Dormaa main road
Tel: 035-2322251 / 035 -2322037
035 -2322165
GPS: BD-0002-2056
Email: customercare@agricbank.com112         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
Central Region
AGONA SWEDRU BRANCH
Opposite Calvary Crusaders Church, 
Off Swedru Street
Tel: 033-2093517/ 033-2192883
GPS: CO-0000-9131
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
ASSIN FOSU BRANCH
Opposite the Foso Lorry station 
Opposite the Foso Lorry station on 
the main Cape Coast-Kumasi Road
Tel: 033-2140548 / 033-2192203 / 
033-2192200
GPS: CR-0008-8501
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
CAPE COAST MAIN BRANCH
Chapel Square opposite John 
Wesley Methodist Church
Tel: 031-7010094  
GPS: CC-008-3558
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
KASOA BRANCH
Off the Bodweasi Road, 
Near Nsaniya Secondary School
Tel: 055-2560717  
GPS: CX-013-6878
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
MANKESSIM BRANCH
At Abochie area on the Ajumako road
Tel: 034-020 93017 / 034-209 3015
GPS: CM-0412-5849
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
UCC BRANCH
Near Casely – Hayford Hall, UCC 
Campus GPS CC-007-3155
Tel: 033-2131989   
GPS: CC-143-7930
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Eastern Region
ASIAKWA BRANCH
Off the Kyebi – Bunso Road, 
Adjacent the Asiakwa Police Station. 
EE 1314-8594
Tel: 0302-962 144 / 0302-962 145
GPS: EE-1314-8792
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
KADE BRANCH
Off Okumaning Road, Adjacent GCB. 
P.O.Box KD 31, Kade. 
GPS: EK 0005-0093
Tel: 0302 963 285 / 0302 963 286
Email: customercare@agricbank.comKOFORIDUA BRANCH
Opposite B. Foster Bakery, Off B 
Foster Road. GPS EN 0100-632
Tel: 034-2022739 / 034-2022235/ 
034-2021048  GPS: EN-010-0736
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
NKAWKAW BRANCH
Off Nkawkaw-Kumasi Road ,Near 
Ghana Commercial Bank and Behind 
Total Filling Station.  
GPS: EJ-0000-5072 
Tel: 020-4345378 / 034-3122041 
034-3122068, 034-3122028, 
034-3122457
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
SUHUM BRANCH
Off Suhum-Koforidua Road, Near 
Fanteakwa Rural Bank or Near the 
Police station. GPS: ES-0000-8212
Tel: 034-7070198 / 034-2522373
034-2522374
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Northern Region  
     
SAVELUGU BRANCH
5 minutes drive from Airport junction 
on the Salvelugu/Walewale road Or 
closer to Savelugu Hospital 
Tel: 037-2095822 / 037209822 / 
037209820  GPS: NU-0020-3873
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
TAMALE-ABOABO BRANCH
Near Aboabo Market, Off Tamale – 
Aboabo Road. GPS: NT-0005-7016
Tel: 037-2026242 / 037-2023700
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
TAMALE-MAIN BRANCH
Bolga Road Near Ghana 
Commercial Bank
Tel: 037-2022629 / 037-2022938
GPS: NT-0003-5994
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
YENDI BRANCH
Left from SSNIT on Gushegu Road 
directly opposite Alhaji Baba mosque
Tel: 020-4345425 / 
426 / 037-7010033 
GPS: NY-0029-2275
TAMALE KALADAN 
Off the Tamale – Kaladan Road
Tel: 037-2022061 / 037-2022014
GPS: NT-0020-7358
Email: customercare@agricbank.comNorth East Region  
 
WALEWALE BRANCH
5 minutes walk from the main lorry 
station on the main high street of 
Tamale/Bolga road. 
Tel: 055-2559468  
GPS: ND-00001-4206
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Savannah Region  
BOLE BRANCH
Wa Road, Near the SSNIT Office 
GPS: NB-00013-0010
Tel: 0372-292172 
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
BUIPE BRANCH
In front of Islamic Primary School, 
Off Kintampo – Tamale Road. 
GPS: N3-00007-1641
Tel: 0302-962-150 / 0372-092 171
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Upper East Region
BAWKU BRANCH
Near Bawku Post Office, 
Off Bawku Main Road 
Tel: 020-4581275 / 050-4851100
GPS: UA-0083-5128
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
NAVRONGO BRANCH
On the main commercial street on 
the UDS road share boundaries with 
Bencyn Pharmacy 
GPS: UK-0007-8361 
Tel: 038-2122200 / 038-2122 204
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
BOLGATANGA BRANCH
Opposite Jubilee Park. 
GPS: UE-0002-8510
Tel: 038-2022321 / 038-2022439 / 
038-202178
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Upper West Region
WA BRANCH
Near SSNIT Office, Off WA main road
Tel: 039-2022095 / 039-2022090 / 
039-2022342
GPS: XW-0006-6353
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
TUMU BRANCH
On Wa Main Road
Tel: 038-2092312
GPS: XS-00003-9114
Email: customercare@agricbank.com2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            113         Volta Region
DENU BRANCH
Near E.P. Church, Off the 
Denu - Adafianu Road
Tel: 036-0530313 / 036-2530613 / 
036-2531210
GPS: VZ-0039-5125 
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
HO BRANCH
In the old Bank for Housing and 
Construction (BHC) premises 
at Toviedzi. Next door to Ghana 
Commercial Bank
Opposite the Municipal Police Station  
GPS: VH-0002-9235
Tel: 036-2028250 / 036-2028284 / 
036-2028289
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
HOHOE BRANCH
Close to the Bank of Ghana 
and VODAFON office    
GPS: VC-0000-0409
Tel: 036-2722027 / 036-2722008
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
JUAPONG BRANCH
Located on the Volta star textile 
Limited (Juapong textiles) road
Tel: 034-2094299 / 034-2094376  
GPS: VT-4198-6051
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
KPANDO BRANCH
Near Weto Rural Bank, Opposite 
Kpando Ghana Commercial Bank 
Near Weto Rural Bank, Opposite 
Kpando Ghana Commercial Bank  
GPS: VP-0006-3528 
Tel: 036-2350939 / 036-2350942
036-2350941 / 0362350940
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
KPEVE BRANCH
Near Kpeve Market, 
Off the Hohoe Road
GPS: VE-0007-9139
Email: customercare@agricbank.comSOGAKOPE BRANCH
Near Volta View Hotel/Directly 
opposite the main bus station, 
Off Tema - Aflao Road 
Tel: 030-2955386/396 / 020-820 
5488   
GPS: VU-000-0755
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Oti Region
KPASSA  BRANCH
Kpassa Township, 
close to the Market
Telephone: 055 9747890
GPS: VO-0000-8483
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
NKWANTA BRANCH
Approximately hundred meters off the 
main road (i.e. the Eastern Corridor).  
Tel: 054-4338198 / 054-4338199  
GPS: VO-00000-8683
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Western North Region
ENCHI BRANCH
Adjacent Electricity 
Company of Ghana. 
Tel: 031-2622124  
GPS: WA-00003-0414
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
SEFWI ESSAM BRANCH
Near Essam Lorry Station
Tel; 055 2673 058 
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
BONSU NKWANTA BRANCH
Near Bonsu Nkwanta Market. 
Tel: 032-2190715  
GPS: WQ-3173-8051
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
JUABOSO AGENCY
Juaboso, close to the market 
close to Fire Service  
Telephone: 055 2569 492
GPS: WQ-0000-4041
Email: customercare@agricbank.comSEFWI WIAWSO BRANCH
Opposite Sefwi Wiawso Police 
Station at the end of the Municipal 
Assembly Road. 
Tel: 031-209 2093/0322-296 339
GPS: WG-0000-2686
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
Western Region
AGONA NKWANTA BRANCH
off Agona Nkwanta -Takoradi Road, 
Opposite Champion Filling Station 
or Police Station. 
Tel: 033-2093517 / 033-292883  
GPS: WH-0002-9770
Email: customercare@agicbank.com
TAKORADI BRANCH
Harbor Road, Next to GCB Bank. 
GPS: WS-406-2512 
Tel: 031-2023511/ 031-
2029060/68/49 
Email: customercare@agricbank.com
GREL APEMENIM BRANCH
Near rubber factory, GREL Office
Tei: 030-3962913  
GPS: WH-0254-8493
Email: customercare@agricbank.com114         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            115         PROXY
I/We__________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________of________________________________________________________________being 
member(s) of Agricultural Development Bank Limited hereby appoint ______________________________________or 
failing him, MR. ALEX BERNASKO, Chairman of Agricultural Development Bank Limited, P. O. Box 4191, Accra, as 
my/our proxy to vote for me/us on my/our behalf at the Annual General Meeting of the Company to be held at the 4th 
Floor, Accra Financial Centre, Accra at eleven o’clock (11:00am) in the forenoon on the 12th August, 2021 and at any 
adjournment thereof.
Please indicate with a tick in the space below how you wish your votes to be cast
Resolutions 
For Against Abstain
1. To receive and consider the financial 
statements and reports of directors and 
auditors for the year ended 31st December 
2020;
2. To appoint the following as directors: 
2.1.  Daasebre Akuamoah Agyapong II 2.1 
2.2.  Hon. Alhaji Habib Iddrisu 2.2
2.3.  Prof. Eric Yirenkyi Danquah 2.3
3. To re-elect the following directors retiring 
by rotation:
i. Mary Abla Kessie.
ii. Peter Quartey.
iii. Evron Rothschild Hughes.3(i) 
3(ii)
3(iii)
4. To approve the remuneration of directors 4
5. To authorise the directors to determine 
the remuneration of the auditors for the 
financial year ending December 31, 2021. 5116         2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements
Dated this ___________________________ day of __________________________ 2021
Signed_____________________________________________
Proxy
Annual Report and Financial Statements
THIS FORM SHOULD NOT BE COMPLETED AND SENT TO THE SECRETARY IF THE SENDER WILL BE ATTENDING 
THE MEETING.
1. Provision has been made on the form for MR. ALEX BERNASKO, the Chairman of the Meeting, to act as your Proxy 
but if you so wish, you may insert in the blank space the name of any person whether a member of the Company or not 
who will attend the Meeting and vote on your behalf instead of the Chairman.
2. In the case of joint holder, each holder must sign. In case of a company, the Proxy Form must be signed by a Director 
and its Common Seal appended.If you intend to sign a Proxy, please sign the above Proxy Form and post/submit it to 
reach the Registrar, Central Securities Depository, Cedi House, Accra within 48 hours before the meeting. 2020 Annual Report & Financial Statements            117         
